Olson, Mancur (1965): I. A Theory of Groups and Organizations. II. Group 
Size and Group Behavior. In: Olson, Mancur (ed.): The Logic of Collective 
Action. Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, pp. 5-52, pp. 53-65. 

I 

A  Theory  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

A.  THE  PURPOSE  OF  ORGANIZATION 

Since most  (though by  no means all)  of the action taken  by  or on 
behalf of groups of individuals is  taken through organizations, it will 
be helpful to consider organizations in a general or  theoretical  way.1 
The logical  place  to  begin  any  systematic  study  of  organizations  is 
with  their  purpose.  But  there  are  all  types  and  shapes  and  sizes  of 
organizations,  even  of  economic  organizations,  and  there  is  then 
some  question  whether  there  is  any  single  purpose  that  would  be 
characteristic  of  organizations  generally.  One  purpose  that  is  none(cid:173)
theless  characteristic of  most  organizations,  and  surely  of  practically 
all organizations with  an  important economic  aspect,  is  the  further(cid:173)
ance of the interests of their members. That would seem  obvious,  at 
least from the economist's perspective. To be sure, some organizations 
may  out  of  ignorance  fail  to  further  their  members'  interests,  and 
others  may  be  enticed into serving only  the  ends  of  the  leadership.2 

1.  Economists  have  for  the  most  part  neglected  to  develop  theories  of  organiza(cid:173)
tions,  but  there  are a  few  works  from  an  economic  point  of  view  on  the  subject.  See, 
for  example,  three  papers  by  Jacob  Marschak,  "Elements  for  a  Theory  of  Teams," 
Management  Science,  I  (January  1955),  127-137,  "Towards  an  Economic  Theory  of 
Organization  and  Information,"  in  Decision  Procesus,  ed.  R.  M.  Thrall,  C.  H.  Combs, 
and  R.  L.  Davis  (New  York:  John  Wiley,  1954),  pp.  187-220,  and  "Efficient  and 
Viable  Organization  Forms,"  in  Modern  Organization  Theory, ed.  Mason  Haire  (New 
York:  John  Wiley,  1959),  pp.  307-320;  two  papers  by  R.  Radner,  "Application  of 
Linear  Programming  to  Team  Decision  Problems,"  Management  Science,  V  (January 
1959),  143-150,  and  "Team  Decision  Problems,"  Annals  of  Mathematical  Statistics, 
XXXIII  (September  1962),  857-881;  C.  B.  McGuire,  "Some  Team  Models  of  a  Sales 
Organization,"  Management  Science,  VII  (January  1961),  101-130;  Oskar  Morgen(cid:173)
stern,  Prolegomena  to  a  Theory  of  Organization  (Santa  Monica,  Cali£.:  RAND 
Research  Memorandum  734,1951); James  G.  March  and  Herbert A.  Simon,  Organiza(cid:173)
tions  (New  York:  John  Wiley,  1958);  Kenneth  Boulding,  The  Organizational 
Revolution  (New  York:  Harper,  1953). 

2.  Max  Weber called  attention  to  the  case  where  an  organization  continues  to  exist 
for  some  time  after  it  has  become  meaningless  because  some  official  is  making  a 
living  out  of  it.  See  his  Theory  of  Social  and  Economic  Organization,  trans.  Talcott 
Parsons  and  A.  M.  Henderson  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1947),  p.  318. 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

6 
But  organizations  often  perish  if  they  do  nothing  to  further  the 
interests  of  their  members,  and  this  factor  must  severely  limit  the 
number of organizations  that fail  to  serve  their  members. 

The  idea  that  organizations  or  associations  exist  to  further  the 
interests of their members is hardly novel,  nor peculiar to economics; 
it goes  back  at least to Aristotle,  who wrote, "Men journey  together 
with a view to  particular advantage,  and by  way  of providing some 
particular  thing  needed  for  the  purposes  of  life,  and  similarly  the 
political  association  seems  to  have  come  together  originally,  and  to 
continue  in  existence,  for  the  sake  of  the  general  advantages  it 
brings." S  More  recently  Professor Leon  Festinger, a social  psycholo(cid:173)
gist, pointed out that "the  attraction of group membership  is  not  so 
much in sheer belonging, but rather in attaining something by  means 
of  this  membership." f  The late  Harold  Laski,  a  political  scientist, 
took  it  for  granted that "associations exist  to  fulfill  purposes  which 
a group of men  have  in common." 11 

The  kinds  of  organizations  that  are  the  focus  of  this  study  are 
expected to further the interests of their members.6  Labor unions  are 
expected  to  strive  for  higher  wages  and  better  working  conditions 
for  their  members;  farm  organizations  are  expected  to  strive  for 
favorable.legislation for  their members;  cartels are expected to strive 
for higher prices  for  participating firms;  the  corporation  is  expected 
to further the interests  of its  stockholders; 7  and  the state  is  expected 

3.  EthiC's  viii.9.1160a. 
4.  Leon  Festinger,  "Group  Attraction  and  Membership,"  in  Group  Dynamics,  ed. 
Dorwin  Cartwright  and  Alvin  Zander  (Evanston,  Ill.:  Row,  Peterson,  1953),  p.  93. 
5.  A.  Grammar  of Politics,  4th  ed.  (London:  George  Alien  &.  Unwin,  1939), p.  67. 
6.  Philanthropic  and  religious  organizations  are  not  necessarily  expected  to  serve 
only  the  interests  of  their  members;  such  organizations  have  other  purposes  that  are 
considered  more  important.  however  much  their  members  "need"  to  belong,  or  are 
improved  or  helped  by  belonging.  But  the  complexity  of such  organizations  need  not 
be  debated  at  length  here,  because  this  study  will  focus  on  organizations  with  a 
significant  economic  aspect.  The emphasis  here  will  have  something  in  common  with 
what  Max  Weber  called  the  "associative  group";  he  called  a  group  associative  if  "the 
orientation  of social  action  with  it  rests  on  a  rationally  motivated  agreement."  Weber 
contrasted  his  "associative  group"  with  the  "communal  group"  which  was  centered 
on personal  affection,  erotic  relationships,  etc.,  like  the  family.  (See  Weber,  pp.  136-
139, and  Grace  Coyle.  Sodal Process in  Organiud Groups,  New  York:  Richard  Smith, 
Inc.,  1930, pp.  7-9.)  The logic  of  the  theory  developed  here  can  be  extended  to  cover 
communal, religious, and  philanthropic organizations,  but  the theory  is  not particularly 
useful  in  studying  such  groups.  See  my  pp.  61n17.  159-162. 

7.  That  is,  its  members.  This  study  does  not  follow  the  terminological  usage  of 
those  organization  theorists  who describe employees  as  "members" of  the  organization 
for  which  they  work.  Here  it  is  more  convenient  to  follow  the  language  of  everyday 

A  T hcary  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

7 

to further the common interests of its citizens  (though in this nation(cid:173)
alistic age the state often has interests and ambitions apart from those 
of  its  citizens). 

Notice  that  the interests  that  all  of  these  diverse  types  of  organi(cid:173)

zations  are  expected  to  further  are  for  the  most  part  common 
interests: the union members' common interest in higher  wages, the 
farmers' common interest in favorable legislation, the cartel members' 
common interest in higher prices, the stockholders' common interest 
in higher dividends and stock prices, the citizens' common interest in 
good  government.  It is  not  an  accident  that  the  diverse  types  of 
organizations  listed  are  all  supposed  to  work  primarily  for  the 
common  interests  of  their  members.  Purely  personal  or  individual 
interests can  be advanced, and  usually  advanced  most  efficiently,  by 
individual,  unorganized  action.  There  is  obviously  no  purpose  in 
having  an  organization  when  individual,  unorganized  action  can 
serve  the  interests  of  the  individual  as  well  as  or  better  than  an 
organization;  there  would,  for  example,  be  no  point in  forming  an 
organization  simply  to  play  solitaire.  But  when  a  number  of  indi(cid:173)
viduals  have  a  common  or  collective  interest-when  they  share  a 
single  purpose  or  objective-individual,  unorganized  action  (as  we 
shall  soon  see)  will  either  not  be  able  to  advance  that  common 
interest at all,  or will not be  able to advance that interest adequately. 
Organizations  can  therefore  perform  a  function  when  there  are 
common  or  group  interests,  and  though  organizations  often  also 
serve  purely  personal,  individual  interests,  their  characteristic  and 
primary  function  is  to  advance  the  common  interests  of  groups  of 
individuals. 

The  assumption  that  organizations  typically  exist  to  further  the 
common  interests  of  groups  of  people  is  implicit  in  most  of  the 
literature  about organizations,  and  two  of the  writers  already  cited 
make this assumption explicit: Harold Laski emphasized that organ(cid:173)
izations exist to achieve purposes or  interests which "a group of men 
have in common,"  and Aristotle apparently  had  a similar notion  in 
mind  when  he  argued  that  political  associations  are  created  and 
maintained  because  of  the  "general  advantages"  they  bring.  R.  M. 

usage  instead,  and  to  distinguish  the  members  of,  say,  a  union  from  the  employees 
of  that  union.  Similarly,  the  members  of  the  union  will  be  considered  employees  of 
the  corporation  for  which  they  work,  whereas  the  members  of  the  corporation  are 
the  common  stockholders. 

8 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

MacIver  also  made  this  point  explicitly  when  he  said  that  "every 
organization presupposes an interest which its members all share." 8 
Even  when  unorganized  groups  are  discussed,  at  least  in  treat(cid:173)

ments  of  "pressure  groups"  and  "group  theory,"  the  word  "group" 
is  used in such  a  way  that  it means  "a number of individuals  with 
a common interest." It would of course be  reasonable to label even a 
number of people selected at random (and thus without any common 
interest or unifying characteristic)  as a "group" j  but most discussions 
of  group  behavior  seem  to  deal  mainly  with  groups  that  do  have 
common  interests.  As  Arthur  Bentley,  the  founder  of  the  "group 
theory" of modern political science, put it, "there is no group without 
its  interest." 9  The social  psychologist  Raymond  Cattell  was  equally 
explicit, and stated that "every group has its  interest." 10  This is  also 
the  way  the  word  "group"  will  be  used  here. 

] ust  as  those  who  belong  to  an  organization  or  a  group  can  be 
presumed to have  a  common interest,l1  so  they  obviously  also  have 
purely individual interests, different from those  of the others in  the 
organization  or  group.  All  of  the  members  of  a  labor  union,  for 
example,  have  a common interest in higher  wages,  but at the  same 
time each worker has a unique interest in his personal income, which 
depends not only on the rate of wages but also  on the length of time 
that he  works. 

8.  R.  M.  Maclver,  "Interests," Eflcyclopal!dja of thl!  Social Scil!f1C1!s,  VII  (New York: 

Macmillan,  1932),  147. 

9.  Arthur  Bentley,  Thl!  PrOCl!S1  of  GOtJl!rflml!flt  (Evanston,  Ill.:  Principia  Press, 
1949), p.  211.  David  B.  Truman  takes  a  similar  approach;  see  his  T hI!  GotJl!rflml!f1tai 
ProCl!SI  (New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knop£,  1958),  pp.  33-35.  See  also  Sidney  Verba, 
Small  Groups  and  Political  Bl!hatJior  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton  University  Press, 
1961),  pp.  12-13. 

10.  Raymond  Cattell,  "Concepts  and  Methods  in 

the  Measurement  of  Group 
Syntality,"  in  Small  Groups,  ed.  A.  Paul  Hare,  Edgard  F.  Borgatta,  and  Robert  F. 
Bales  (New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knop£,  1955),  p.  115. 

11.  Any  organization  or group  will  of course  usually  be  divided  into  subgroups  or 
factions  that  are  opposed  to  one  another.  This  fact  does  not  weaken  the  assumption 
made  here  that organizations  exist  to  serve  the  common  interests  of members,  for  the 
assumption  does  not  imply  that  intragroup  conflict  is  neglected.  The  opposing  groups 
within  an  organization  ordinarily  have  some  interest  in  common  (if  not,  why  would 
they  maintain  the  organization?),  and  the  members  of  any  subgroup  or  faction  also 
have  a  separate  common  interest  of  their  own.  They  will  indeed  often  have  a 
common  purpose  in  defeating  some  other  subgroup  or  faction.  The  approach  used 
here  does  not  neglect  the  conflict  within  groups  and  organizations,  then,  because  it 
considers each  organization  as  a  unit only  to  the  extent  that  it does  in fact  attempt  to 
serve  a  common  interest,  and  considers  the  various  subgroups  as  the  relevant  units 
with  common  interests  to  analyze  the  factional  strife. 

A  Theory  of Groups  and  Organizations 

9 

B.  PUBUC  GOODS  AND  LARGE  GROUPS 

The combination of individual interests  and common  interests  in 
an organization suggests an analogy  with a competitive market. The 
firms  in  a perfectly competitive  industry,  for  example,  have  a  com(cid:173)
mon  interest  in  a  higher  price  for  the  industry's  product.  Since  a 
uniform price must prevail in such  a market, a firm  cannot expect a 
higher price for itself unless all of the other firms in the industry also 
have this higher price. But a firm in a competitive market also has an 
interest in selling as  much as  it can,  until the  cost  of  producing an(cid:173)
other unit exceeds the price of that unit. In this  there is  no common 
interest; each firm's interest is  directly opposed to  that of every other 
firm,  for  the more other firms  sell,  the  lower  the  price  and  income 
for any given firm. In short, while all firms  have a common interest 
in  a  higher  price,  they  have  antagonistic  interests  where  output  is 
concerned. This can be illustrated with a simple supply-and-demand 
model.  For the sake of a  simple  argument,  assume  that  a  perfectly 
competitive  industry  is  momentarily  in  a  disequilibrium  position, 
with price exceeding marginal cost for all firms at their present out(cid:173)
put. Suppose,  too,  that all  of the  adjustments  will  be  made  by  the 
firms  already  in  the industry  rather than  by  new entrants,  and  that 
the  industry  is  on  an  inelastic  portion  of  its  demand  curve.  Since 
price exceeds marginal cost for all firms, output will increase.  But as 
all  firms  increase  production,  the  price  falls;  indeed,  since  the  in(cid:173)
dustry  demand  curve  is  by  assumption  inelastic,  the  total  revenue 
of  the  industry  will  decline.  Apparently  each  firm  finds  that  with 
price exceeding marginal cost,  it pays  to  increase  its  output,  but the 
result is that each firm  gets  a smaller  profit. Some  economists  in an 
earlier day may have questioned this result,12  but the fact that profit(cid:173)
maximizing firms in a perfectly competitive industry can act contrary 
to their interests as a group is now widely understood and accepted.l3 
A group of profit-maximizing firms can act to reduce their aggregate 
profits  because  in perfect competition each  firm  is,  by  definition,  so 
small that it can  ignore  the  effect  of  its  output on  price.  Each  firm 
finds  it  to its advantage  to increase  output to  the  point  where  mar-

12.  See  J.  M.  Clark,  The  Economics  of  Overh~ad Corts  (Chicago:  University  of 
Chicago  Press,  1923),  p.  417,  and  Frank  H.  Knight.  Risk,  Unc~rtainty  and  Profit 
(Boston:  Houghton  Milllin,  1921),  p.  193. 
13.  Edward  H. Chamberlin,  Monopolistic  Comp~tition, 6th  w.  (Cambridge,  Mass.: 

Harvard  University  Press,  1950),  p.  4. 

10 

The  Logic 01  Collective  Acti(m 

ginal cost equals price and to ignore the effects of its extra output on 
the  position  of the  industry.  It is  true  that the  net  result  is  that  all 
firms  are  worse  off,  but this  does  not  mean  that  every  firm  has  not 
maximized its profits. If a firm,  foreseeing the fall  in price  resulting 
from the increase in industry output, were to restrict its own output, 
it would lose  more than ever,  for its price  would fall  quite  as  much 
in any case  and it would have a smaller output as  well.  A  firm  in  a 
perfectly competitive market gets only  a small part of the benefit  (or 
a  small  share  of  the  industry's  extra  revenue)  resulting  from  a 
reduction in that firm's  output. 

For these  reasons  it is  now generally  understood  that if the firms 
in an industry are  maximizing profits, the profits for the Industry as 
a  whole  will  be  less  than  they  might  otherwise  be.14  And  almost 
everyone would agree that this theoretical conclusion fits  the facts for 
markets  characterized  by  pure  competition.  The important  point  is 
that this is true because, though all the firms  have a common interest 
in  a  higher  price  for  the  industry'S  product,  it  is  in  the  interest  of 
each firm that the other firms pay the cost-in terms of the necessary 
reduction  in  output-needed  to  obtain  a  higher  price. 

About the only  thing that keeps  prices  from  falling  in  accordance 
with  the  process  just  described  in  perfectly  competitive  markets  is 
outside intervention. Government price supports, tariffs, cartel agree(cid:173)
ments,  and  the  like  may  keep  the  firms  in  a  competitive  market 
from  acting  contrary  to  their  interests.  Such  aid  or  intervention  is 
quite common. It is then important to ask how it comes about. How 
does  a  competitive  industry  obtain  government  assistance  in  main(cid:173)
taining  the  price  of  its  product? 

Consider  a  hypothetical,  competitive  industry,  and  suppose  that 
most of  the producers in that industry  desire a tariff, a price-support 
program, or some other government intervention to increase the price 
for their product. To obtain any such assistance from the government, 
the  producers  in  this  industry  will  presumably  have  to  organize  a 
lobbying organization;  they  will  have  to  become  an  active  pressure 
group.15  This  lobbying  organization  may  have  to  conduct  a  con-

14.  For  a  fuller  discussion  of  this  question  see  Mancur  Olson,  Jr.,  and  David 
McFarland,  "The  Restoration  of  Pure  Monopoly  and  the  Concept  of  the  Industry," 
Quarurly  lournal  0/  Economics,  LXXVI  (November  1962),  613-631. 

15.  Robert  Michds  contends  in  his  classic  study  that  "democracy  is  inconceivable 
without  organization,"  and  that  "the  principle  of  organization  is  an  absolutely 
essential  condition  for  the  political  struggle  of  the  masses."  See  his  Political  Parties, 

A  T hemy of Groups and  Organizations 

11 
siderable  campaign.  If significant  resistance  is  encountered,  a  great 
amount of money will be  required.16 Public relations experts  will  be 
needed  to  influence  the  newspapers,  and  some  advertising  may  be 
necessary.  Professional organizers  will  probably  be  needed  to  organ(cid:173)
ize  "spontaneous  grass  roots"  meetings  among  the  distressed  pro(cid:173)
ducers  in  the  industry,  and  to  get  those  in  the  industry  to  write 
letters  to  their  congressmen.n  The  campaign  for  the  government 
assistance will take the time of some of the producers in the industry, 
as  well  as  their money. 

There  is  a  striking  parallel  between  the  problem  the  perfectly 
competitive  industry  faces  as  it  strives  to  obtain  government  assist(cid:173)
ance,  and  the  problem  it  faces  in  the  marketplace  when  the  firms 
increase  output  and  bring  about  a  faU  in  price.  lust  as  it  was  not 
rational  for  a particular producer to  restrict his output in  order that 
there  might be a  higher  price  for  the  product  of  his  industry,  so  it 
would  not  be  rational  for  him  to  sacrifice  his  time  and  money  to 
support a lobbying organization  to obtain  government assistance  for 
the industry. In  neither case  would it be  in  the interest  of  the indi(cid:173)
vidual  producer  to  assume  any  of  the  costs  himself.  A  lobbying 
organization,  or  indeed  a  labor  union  or  any  other  organization, 
working in the interest of a large group of firms  or  workers in some 
industry,  would  get  no  assistance  from  the  rational,  self-interested 
individuals in  that industry. This  would be true even  if  everyone  in 
the  industry  were  absolutely  convinced  that  the  proposed  program 
was  in  their  interest  (though  in  fact  some  might  think  otherwise 
and  make  the  organization's  task  yet  more  difficult).18 

Although  the  lobbying  organization  is  only  one  example  of  the 
logical  analogy  between  the  organization  and  the  market,  it  is  of 

trans.  Eden  and  Cedar  Paul  (New  York:  Dover  Publications,  1959),  pp.  21-22.  See 
also  Robert  A.  Brady,  Busint:Ss as a System  of POW"  (New York:  Columbia  University 
Press,  1943).  p.  193. 

16.  Alexander  Heard,  Th~ Costs  of D~mocracy (Chapel  Hill:  University  of  North 
Carolina  Press,  1960), especially  note  1,  pp.  95-96. For example,  in  1947  the  National 
Association  of  Manufacturers  spent  over  $4.6  million,  and  over  a  somewhat  longer 
period  the  American  Medical  Association  spent  as  much  on  a  campaign  against 
compulsory  health  insurance. 

17.  "If the  full  truth  were  ever  known  ... lobbying, in all  its  ramifications,  would 
prove  to  be  a  billion  dollar  industry."  U.S.  Congress,  House,  Select  Committee  on 
Lobbying  Activities,  R~port, 81st  Cong.,  2nd  Sess.  (1950),  as  quoted  in  the  Congres(cid:173)
sional  Quart~rly Almanac, 81st  Cong.,  2nd  Sess.,  VI,  764-765. 

18.  For  a  logically  possible  but  practically  meaningless  exception  to  the  conclusion 

of  this  paragraph,  see  footnote  68  in  this  chapter. 

12 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

some  practical  importance.  There  are  many  powerful  and  well(cid:173)
financed lobbies with mass support in existence now, but these lobby(cid:173)
ing organizations do  not get that support because  of their legislative 
achievements. The most powerful lobbying organizations now obtain 
their funds and their following for other reasons, as later parts of this 
study  will  show. 

Some  critics  may  argue  that  the  rational  person  will,  indeed, 
support a large organization, like a lobbying organization, that works 
in his interest, because he  knows  that if he  does  not, others  will  not 
do  so  either,  and  then  the  organization  will  fail,  and  he  will  be 
without the  benefit that the organization could have  provided.  This 
argument shows the need for the analogy with the perfectly competi(cid:173)
tive market. For it would  be  quite  as  reasonable to  argue  that  prices 
will  never fall  below  the  levels  a  monopoly  would  have  charged  in 
a perfectly competitive market, because if one  firm  increased  its  out(cid:173)
put,  other firms  would also,  and  the price  would  fall;  but each  firm 
could  foresee  this,  so  it  would  not  start  a  chain  of  price-destroying 
increases  in  output.  In  fact,  it  does  not  work  out  this  way  in  a 
competitive market;  nor in a large organization. When  the  number 
of  firms  involved  is  large,  no  one  will  notice  the  effect  on  price  if 
one  firm  increases  its  output,  and  so  no  one  will  change  his  plans 
because of it.  Similarly, in a large organization, the  loss  of one dues 
payer  will  not  noticeably  increase  the  burden  for  any  other  one 
dues  payer,  and  so  a  rational  person  would  not  believe  that  if  he 
were  to  withdraw  from  an  organization  he  would  drive  others  to 
do  so. 

The foregoing  argument  must at the least  have  some  relevance  to 
economic organizations  that are  mainly  means  through  which  indi(cid:173)
viduals attempt  to  obtain  the same  things  they  obtain through  their 
activities in the market. Labor unions, for example, are organizations 
through  which  workers  strive  to get  the  same  things  they  get  with 
their individual efforts in the market-higher wages,  better working 
conditions,  and the  like.  It would  be  strange  indeed  if the  workers 
did  not confront  some  of  the  same  problems in  the  union  that  they 
meet in the market, since their efforts in both places have some of the 
same  purposes. 

However similar the  purposes  may  be,  critics may  object that atti(cid:173)
tudes in organizations are  not at all like those in  markets. In organi(cid:173)
zations,  an  emotional  or  ideological  element  is  often  also  involved. 
Does this make  the  argument  offered  here  practically  irrelevant? 

A  Therwy  of Groups  and  Organizations 

13 

A  most  important  type  of  organization-the  national  state-will 

serve to test this  objection. Patriotism is  probably  the  strongest  non(cid:173)
economic motive for organizational allegiance in modern times. This 
age  is  sometimes called  the  age  of  nationalism.  Many  nations  draw 
additional strength and unity  from  some powerful ideology,  such  as 
democracy  or communism, as  well  as  from a common  religion,  lan(cid:173)
guage,  or  cultural  inheritance.  The  state  not  only  has  many  such 
powerful sources  of support;  it also  is  very  important  economicall~·. 
Almost  any government is economically  beneficial  to its  citizens,  in 
that  the  law  and  order  it  provides  is  a  prerequisite  of  all  civilized 
economic activity.  But despite  the force  of  patriotism,  the  appeal  of 
the  national  ideology,  the  bond  of  a  common  culture,  and  the  in(cid:173)
dispensability  of  the  system  of  law  and  order,  no  major  state  in 
modern  history  has  been  able  to  support  itself  through  voluntary 
dues  or  contributions.  Philanthropic  contributions  are  not  even  a 
significant  source  of  revenue for  most countries.  Taxes, compulsory 
payments  by  definition,  are  needed.  Indeed,  as  the  old  saying  indi(cid:173)
cates,  their  necessity  is  as  certain  as  death  itself. 

If the  state,  with  all  of  the  emotional  resources  at  its  command, 
cannot  finance  its  most  basic  and  vital  activities  without  resort  to 
compulsion,  it  would  seem  that  large  private  organizations  might 
also  have  difficulty  in  getting  the  individuals  in  the  groups  whose 
interests they attempt to advance to make the necessary contributions 
voluntarily.19 

The reason the state cannot survive on voluntary dues or payments, 

19.  Sociologists  as  well  as  economists  have  observed  that  ideological  motives  alone 
are  not  sufficient  to  bring  forth  the  continuing  effort  of  large  masses  of  people.  Max 
Weber  provides  a  notable  example: 

"All  economic  activity  in  a  market  economy  is  undertaken  and  carried  through 
by  individuals  for  their own  ideal  or material  interests.  This  is  naturally  just  as  true 
when  economic  activity  is  oriented  to  the  patterns of  order  of corporate  groups  ..• 
"Even  if an  economic  system  were  organized  on  a  socialistic  basis,  there  would  be 
no  fundamental  difference  in  this  respect  .  .  .  The  structure  of  interests  and  the 
relevant  situation  might  change;  there  would  be  other  means  of  pursuing  interests, 
but  this  fundamental  factor  would  remain  just  as  relevant  as  before.  It  is  of  course 
true  that  economic  action  which  is  oriented  on  purely  ideological  grounds  to  the 
interest  of others  does  exist.  But  it  is  even  more  certain  that  the  mass  of  men  do  not 
act  in  this  way,  and  it  is  an  induction  from  experience  that  they  cannot  do  so  and 
never  will  . . .  

"In  a  market  economy  the  interest  in  the  maximization  of  income  is  necessarily 

the  driving  force  of  all  economic  activity."  (Weber,  pp.  319-320.) 

Takott Parsons  and  Neil Smdser go even  further in  postulating  that  "performance" 
throughout  society  is  proportional  to  the  "rewards"  and  "sanctions"  involved.  See 
their  Economy  and  Society  (Glencoe,  111.:  Free  Press,  1954),  pp.  50-69. 

14 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

but must  rely  on  taxation,  is  that  the  most  fundamental  services  a 
nation-state  provides  are,  in one  important respect,20  like  the higher 
price  in  a  competitive  market:  they  must  be  available  to  everyone 
if  they  are  available  to  anyone.  The  basic  and  most  elementary 
goods  or  services  provided  by  government,  like  defense  and  police 
protection, and the system of law and order generally,  are  such  that 
they  go  to  everyone  or  practically  everyone  in  the  nation.  It would 
obviously  not  be  feasible,  if  indeed  it  were  possible,  to  deny  the 
protection provided by the military services, the police, and the courts 
to  those  who  did  not  voluntarily  pay  their  share  of  the  costs  of 
government, and taxation  is  accordingly  necessary.  The common  or 
collective benefits provided by governments are usually called "public 
goods"  by  economists,  and the concept of public goods  is  one of the 
oldest  and  most  important  ideas  in  the  study  o£  public  finance.  A 
common, collective, or public good  is  here  defined  as  any  good  such 
that, if any  person Xi in a group Xv ... J  Xi' ... , X"  consumes  it, 
it  cannot  feasibly  be  withheld  from  the  others  in  that  group.21  In 
20.  See,  however,  section  E  of  this  chapter,  on  "exclusive"  and  "inclusive"  groups. 
21.  This simple definition  focuses  upon two  points that  are  important  in  the  present 
context.  The first  point  is  that  most  collective  goods  can  only  be  defined  with  respect 
to  some  specific  group.  One  collective  good  goes  to  one  group  of  people,  another 
collective  good  to  another  group;  one  may  benefit  the  whole  world,  another  only  two 
specific  people.  Moreover,  some  goods  are  collective  goods  to  those  in  one  group  and 
at  the  same  time  private  goods  to  those  in  another,  because  some  individuals  can  be 
kept  from  consuming  them  and  others  can't.  Take  for  example  the  parade  that  is  a 
collective  good  to  all  those  who  live  in  tall  buildings  overlooking  the  parade  route, 
but  which  appears  to  be a  private  good  to  those  who can  see  it only  by  buying  tickets 
for  a  seat  in  the  stands  along  the  way.  The  second  point  is  that  once  the  relevant 
group  has  been  defined,  the  definition  used  here,  like  Musgrave's,  distinguishes  col(cid:173)
lective  good  in  terms  of  infeasibility  of  excluding  potential  consumers  of  the  good. 
This  approach  is  used  because  collective  goods  produced  by  organizations  of  all  kinds 
seem  to  be  such that exclusion  is  normally  not  feasible.  To  be  sure,  for  some  collective 
goods  it  is  physically  possible  to  practice  exclusion.  But,  as  Head  has  shown,  it  is  not 
necessary  that  exclusion  be  technically  impossible;  it  is  only  necessary  that  it  be 
infeasible  or  uneconomic.  Head  has  also  shown  most  clearly  that  nonexcludability  is 
only  one  of  two basic  elements  in  the  traditional  understanding of  public  goods.  The 
other, he points out,  is  "jointness of supply."  A good  has  "jointness" if making it avail(cid:173)
able  to  one  individual  means  that  it can  be  easily  or freely  supplied  to  others  as  well. 
The  polar  case  of jointness  would  be  Samuelson's  pure  public  good,  which  is  a  good 
such  that  additional  consumption  of  it  by  one  individual  does  not  diminish  the 
amount  available  to  others.  By  the  definition  used  here,  jointness  is  not  a  necessary 
attribute  of  a  public  good.  As  later  parts  of  this  chapter  will  show,  at  least  one  type 
of  collective  good  considered  here  exhibits  no  jointness  whatever,  and  few  if  any 
would  have  the  degree  of  jointness  needed  to  qualify  as  pure  public  goods.  Nonethe(cid:173)
less,  most  of  the  collective  goods  to  be  studied  here  do  display  a  large  measure  of 
jointness.  On  the  definition  and  importance  of  public  goods,  see  John  G.  Head, 

A  TheaT'y  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

15 

other words, those  who do not purchase or pay for any of the public 
or  collective  good  cannot  be  excluded  or  kept  from  sharing  in  the 
consumption of the good, as  they can where noncollective goods  are 
concerned. 

Students of public  finance  have,  however,  neglected  the  fact  that 
the  achievement  of  any  common  goal  or  the  satisfaction  of  any 
common  interest  means  that  a  public  aT'  collective  good  has  been 
provided  for  that  groUp.22  The very  fact  that  a  goal  or  purpose  is 
common to a group means that no one in the group is excluded from 
the  benefit  or satisfaction  brought  about  by  its  achievement.  As  the 
opening paragraphs of  this  chapter indiGated,  almost all  groups  and 
organizations  have  the  purpose  of  serving the  common  interests  of 
their members. As R. M. Maclver puts it, "Persons ... have common 
interests in the degree to which they participate in a cause ... which 
indivisibly embraces them all." 23  It is  of the essence of an organiza(cid:173)
tion  that  it  provides  an  inseparable,  generalized  benefit.  It  follows 
that  the  provision  of  public  or  collective  goods  is  the  fundamental 
function of organizations generally. A state is first  of all an organiza(cid:173)
tion  that  provides  public  goods  for  its  members,  the  citizens;  and 
other  types  of  organizations  similarly  provide  collective  goods  for 
their  members. 

And just as a state cannot support itself by voluntary contributions, 
or by  selling its basic services on the  market, neither can other large 
organizations  support themselves  without  providing  some  sanction, 

"Public Goods and Public  Policy,"  Public  Finance,  vo!.  XVII,  no.  3  (1962),  197-219; 
Richard  Musgrave,  The  Theory  of Public  Finance  (New  York:  McGraw-HilI,  1959); 
Paul  A.  Samuelson,  "The  Pure  Theory  of  Public  Expenditure,"  "Diagrammatic  Ex(cid:173)
position  of  A  Theory  of  Public  Expenditure,"  and  "Aspects  of  Public  Expenditure 
Theories,"  in  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics,  XXXVI  (November  1954),  387-
390,  XXXVII  (November  1955),  350-356,  and  XL  (November  1958),  332-338.  For 
somewhat  different  opinions  about  the  usefulness  of  the  concept  of  public  goods,  see 
Julius  Margolis,  "A  Comment on  the  Pure  Theory of Public  Expenditure,"  Rn-iew of 
Economics  and  Statistics,  XXXVII  (November  1955),  347-349,  and  Gerhard  Calm, 
"Theory  of  Public  Expenditures,"  Annals  of the  American  Academy  ()f  Political  and 
social  Science,  CLXXXIII  (January  1936),  1-11. 

22.  There is  no  necessity  that a  public  good  to  one  group  in  a  society  is  necessarily 
in  the  interest  of the  society  as  a  whole.  Just  as  a  tariff could  be  a  public  good  to  the 
industry  that  sought  it,  so  the  removal  of  the  tariff  could  be  a  public  good  to  those 
who  consumed  the  industry's  product.  This  is  equally  true  when  the  public-good 
concept  is  applied  only  to  governments;  for  a  military  expenditure,  or  a  tariff,  or 
an  immigration  restriction  that  is  a  public  good  to  one  country  could  be  a  "public 
bad"  to  another  country,  and  harmful  to  world  society  as  a  whole. 

23.  R.  M.  MacIver  in  EllCyclopaedia  ()f  the  Social  Sciences,  VII,  147. 

16 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

or some attraction distinct from the public good itself, that will  lead 
individuals to help hear the burdens of maintaining the organization. 
The  individual  member  of  the  typical  large  organization  is  in  a 
position  analogous  to  that  of  the  firm  in  a  perfectly  competitive 
market, or  the taxpayer in the state: his  own efforts  will  not  have  a 
noticeable  effect  on  the  situation  of  his  organization,  and  he  can 
enjoy any improvements brought about by  others  whether or not he 
has  worked  in  support  of  his  organization. 

There  is  no  suggestion  here  that  states  or  other  organizations 
provide only public or collective  goods.  Governments  often  provide 
noncollective goods like electric power, for example, and they usually 
sell  such  goods  on  the  market  much  as  private  firms  would  do. 
Moreover, as  later parts of this  study  will argue,  large organizations 
that are not able to make membership compulsory must also  provide 
some  noncollective  goods  in  order  to  give  potential  members  an 
incentive to join. Still,  collective  goods  are  the characteristic organi(cid:173)
zational goods,  for  ordinary  noncollective  goods  can  always  be  pro(cid:173)
vided  by  individual  action,  and  only  where  common  purposes  or 
collective  goods  are  concerned  is  organization or group  action  ever 
indispensable.24 

C.  THE  TRADITIONAL  THEORY  OF  GROUPS 

There  is  a  traditional  theory  of  group  behavior  that  implicitly 
assumes  that  private  groups  and  associations  operate  according  to 
principles entirely different from  those  that govern the relationships 
among firms  in  the  maketplace or between  taxpayers  and  the  state. 
This "group theory"  appears to  be  one  of the  principal  concerns  of 
many  political  scientists  in  the  United  States,  as  well  as  a  major 
preoccupation  of  many  sociologists  and  social  psychologists.211  This 
traditional theory  of  groups,  like  most  other  theories,  has  been  de(cid:173)
veloped by  different writers with varying views, and there is  accord(cid:173)
ingly  an  inevitable  injustice  in  any  attempt  to  give  a  common 

24.  It  does  not,  however,  follow  that  organized  or  coordinated  group  action  is 
always  necessary  to  obtain  a  collective  good.  See  section  D  of  this  chapter,  "Small 
Groups." 

25.  For  a  discussion  of  the  importance  of  "groups"  of  various  sorts  and  sizes 
for  the  theory  of  politics,  see  Verba,  Small  Grrmps  and  Political  Behavior;  Truman, 
Governmental  Process;  and  Bentley,  Process  of  Government.  For  examples  of  the 
type  of  research  and  theory  about  groups  in  social  psychology  and  sociology,  see 
Group  Dynamics,  cd.  Cartwright  and  Zander,  and  Small  Groups,  cd.  Hare,  Borgatta, 
and  Bales. 

A  Throry  of Groups  and  Organizations 

17 
treatment to these different views.  Still, the various exponents of the 
traditional  understanding  of  groups  do  have  a  common  relation(cid:173)
ship  to  the  approach  developed  in  the  present  study.  It  is  therefore 
appropriate to speak here in a loose way of a single traditional theory, 
provided  that a  distinction is  drawn  between  the two basic  variants 
of  this  theory:  the  casual  variant  and  the  formal  variant. 

In its most casual form, the traditional view is  that private organi(cid:173)
zations and groups are ubiquitous, and that this ubiquity is  due to a 
fundamental human propensity to form and join associations. As the 
famous Italian political philosopher Gaerano Mosca puts it, men have 
an  "instinct" for  "herding  together  and fighting  with  other herds." 
This "instinct" also "underlies the formation  of all  the divisions  and 
subdivisions ... that arise  within a given society and occasion  moral 
and,  sometimes,  physical conBicts." 28  Aristotle  may  have  had  some 
similar  gregarious  faculty  in  mind  when  he  said  that  man  was  by 
nature a political animal,2T  The ubiquitous and inevitable character 
of group affiliation  was  emphasized in Germany by  Georg Simmel, 
in one of the classics  of sociological  literature,28  and in America by 
Arthur  Bentley,  in  one  of  the  best-known  works  on  political 
science.29  This  universal  joining  tendency  or  propensity  is  often 
thought to have  reached its  highest intensity in the United States.80 
The  formal  variant  of  the  traditional  view  also  emphasizes  the 
universality  of  groups,  but  does  not  begin  with  any  "instinct"  or 
"tendency" to join groups. Instead it attempts  to explain the associa(cid:173)
tions  and  group  affiliations  of  the  present  day  as  an  aspect  of  the 
evolution  of  modern,  industrial  societies  out  of  the  "primitive" 
societies  that  preceded  them.  It  begins  with  the  fact  that  "primary 
groups" S1-groups so small that each of the members has face-te-face 

26.  TAe  Ruling  Class  (New  York:  McGraw-HilI,  1939),  p.  163. 
27.  Politics  i.2.9.1253a.  Many  others  have  also  emphasized  the  human  propensity 
towards  groups;  see  Coyle,  Sonal  Process  in  Or,ani:ud  Groups;  Robcrt  Lowie,  SocUtl 
Organil8ation  (New  York:  Rinehart  &  Co.,  1948);  Truman,  especially  pp.  14-43. 

28.  Georg  Simmel,  Conflict  and  the  Web  01  Group  Affiliations.  trans.  Kurt  WolJl 

and  Reinhard  Bendix  (Glencoe.  111.:  Free  Press,  1950). 

29.  Bentley,  Process  01  G01Iernment. 
30.  Alexis  de  Tocqueville.  Democracy  in  AmmClZ  (New  York:  New  American 
Library,  1956),  p.  198;  rames  Bryce.  TAl'  Ammcan  Commonwealth.  4th  ed.  (New 
York:  Macmillan,  1910).  pp.  281-282;  Charles  A.  Beard  and  Mary  R.  Beard, 
TAe  lUse  01  AmmclZ1l  C;vi/il8l11;on.  rev.  ed.  (New  York:  Macmillan,  1949),  pp.  761-
762;  and  Daniel  Bell,  The  End  01  Ideolon  (Glencoe.  Ill.:  Free  Press,  1960).  esp. 
p.30. 

31.  Charles  H.  Cooler,  Social  Or,anil8at;on  (New  York:  Charles  Scribnu'.  Sona, 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

18 
relationships  with  the  others-like  family  and  kinship  groups  are 
predominant in primitive societies.  As  T alcott  Parsons contends,  "it 
is  well-known  that  in  many  primitive  societies  there  is  a  sense  in 
which kinship 'dominates' the social structure; there are few concrete 
structures in which participation is independent of kinship status." 32 
Only small family or kinship type  units represent the interests of the 
individual. R.  M. Maclver describes  it this way in the Encyclopaedia 
of the Social Sciences:  "Under more simple conditions of  society  the 
social  expression  of  interests  was  mainly  through  caste  or  class 
groups,  age  groups,  kin  groups,  neighborhood  groups,  and  other 
unorganized or loosely  organized solidarities." 33  Under  "primitive" 
conditions  the  small,  family-type  units  account  for  all  or  almost  all 
human  "interaction." 

But,  these  social  theorists  contend,  as  society  develops,  there  is 
structural differentiation:  new  associations  emerge  to  take  on  some 
of the functions  that the  family  had previously  undertaken. "As  the 
social  functions  performed  by  the  family  institution  in  our  society 
have declined, some of these secondary groups, such as labor unions, 
have  achieved  a  rate  of  interaction  that  equals  or  surpasses  that  of 
certain of the primary groups." 34  In Parsons'  words, "It is  clear  that 
in the  more 'advanced'  societies  a  far  greater  part  is  played  by  non(cid:173)
kinship  structures  like  states,  churches,  the  larger  business  firms, 
universities  and  professional  societies  ... The  process  by  which 
non-kinship units become of prime importance in the social  structure 
inevitably  entails  'loss  of  function'  on  the  part  of  some  or  even  all 
of  the  kinship  units." 35  If this  is  true,  and  if,  as  Maclver  claims, 
"the most  marked structural distinction  between  a primitive society 
and a civilized society is  the paucity of specific associations in the one 

1909),  p.  23;  George  C.  Homans,  The  Human  Group  (New  York:  Harcourt,  Brace, 
1950),  p.  1;  Verba,  pp.  11-16. 

32.  Talcott  Parsons  and  Robert  F.  Bales,  Family  (Glencoe,  Ill.:  Free  Press,  1955), 
p.  9;  see  also  Talcott Parsons,  Robert  F.  Bales,  and  Edward  A.  Shils,  Working  Papert 
in  the  Theory  of  Action  (Glencoe,  111.:  Free  Press,  1953). 

33.  MacIver  in  En"cyclopaedia  of  the  Social  ScienCe!,  VII,  144-148,  esp.  147.  See 

also  Truman,  p.  25. 

34.  Truman,  pp.  35-36;  see  also  Eliot  Chapple  and  Carlton  Coon,  Princip/t!s  of 

Anthropology  (New  York:  Henry  Holt,  1942),  pp.  443-462. 

35.  Parsons  and  Bales,  p.  9.  See  also  Bernard  Barber,  "Participation  and  Mass 
Apathy  in  Associations,"'  in  Studies  in  Leadership,  ed.  Alvin  W.  Gouldner  (New 
York:  Harpc:r,  1950),  pp.  477-505,  and  Neil  J.  Smeiser,  Social  Change  in  the  Indus(cid:173)
trial  Revolution  (London:  Roudedge  eo:  Kegan  Paul,  1959). 

A  Theary  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

19 

and their multiplicity  in the  other," 36  then it  would  seem  that  the 
large  association  in the  modern  society  is  in  some  sense  an  equiva(cid:173)
lent of  the  small group  in the  primitive  society,  and  that  the  large, 
modern association and the small, primitive group must be explained 
in  terms of  the  same  fundamental  source  or cause.37 

What then is  the fundamental source which  accounts alike for  the 
small  primary groups  in primitive  societies  and  the  large  voluntary 
association of modern times? This the advocates of the formal variant 
of the theory have left implicit and unclear. It could be  the supposed 
"instinct" or "tendency"  to  form  and  join  associations,  which  is  the 
hallmark of  the  casual  variant of the traditional view;  this  predilec(cid:173)
tion  for  forming  and  joining groups  would  then  manifest  itself  in 
small  family  and  kinship  groups  in  primitive  societies  and in  large 
voluntary associations in modern societies. This interpretation would 
however  probably  be  unfair  to  many  of the  theorists  who  subscribe 
to  the  formal  variant  of  the  traditional  theory,  for  many  of  them 
doubtless  would  not  subscribe  to  any  theory  of  "instincts"  or "pro(cid:173)
pensities." They are no doubt aware that no  explanation  whatever is 
offered when the membership of associations  or groups is  said  to  be 
due  to  an  "instinct"  to  belong;  this  merely  adds  a  word,  not  an 
explanation.  Any  human  action  can  be  ascribed  to  an  instinct  or 
propensity  for  that  kind  of  action,  but  this  adds  nothing  to  our 
knowledge. If instincts  or propensities  to  join  groups  are  ruled  out 
as  meaningless,  what  then  could  be  the  source  of  the  ubiquitous 
groups  and  associations,  large  and  small,  posited  by  the  traditional 
theory?  Probably  some  of the  traditional  theorists  were  thinking in 
"functional"  terms-that is  of  the functions  that  groups  or  associa(cid:173)
tions of different  types  and sizes  can perform.  In primitive societies 
small  primary groups  prevailed  because  they  were  best  suited  (or at 
36.  MacIver  in  Encyclopaedia  of  the  Social  Science!,  VII,  144-148,  esp.  147.  See 
also  Louis  Wirth,  "Urbanism  as  a  Way  of  Life,"  American  Journal  of  Sociology, 
XLIV  (July  1938),  20;  Waiter  Firey,  "Coalition  and  Schism  in  a  Regional  Con(cid:173)
servation  Program,"  Human  Organization,  XV  (Winter  1957),  17-20;  Herbert  Gold(cid:173)
hamer,  "Social  Clubs,"  in  Deve/o[Jment  of  Collective  Enterprite,  ed.  Seba  Eldridge 
(Lawrence:  University  of  Kansas  Press,  1943),  p.  163. 

37.  For  a  different  interpretation  of  the  voluntary  association  see  Oliver  Garceau, 
The  Political  Life  of the  American  Medical  Auociation  (Cambridge.  Mass.:  Harvard 
University  Press,  1941).  p.  3:  "With  the  advent  of  political  intervention  and  control, 
particularly  over  the  economy,  it  became  evident  that  the  formation  of  policy  could 
not  be  confined  to  ballot  or  legislature.  To  fill  the  gap  the  voluntary  group  was 
resorted  to,  not  only  by  the  individual  who  felt  himself  alone,  but  by  the  govern(cid:173)
ment  which  felt  itself  ignorant." 

20 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

least  sufficient)  to  perform certain  functions  for  the  people  of  these 
societies;  in  modern  societies,  by  contrast,  large  associations  are 
supposed  to  predominate  because  in  modern  conditions  they  alone 
are  capable  of  performing  (or  are  better  able  to  perform)  certain 
useful functions  for  the people of these societies. The large voluntary 
association,  for  example, could then  be  explained  by  the  fact  that it 
peformed  a  function-that  is,  satisfied  a  demand,  furthered  an 
interest, or met a need-for some large number of people  that small 
groups could  not  perform  (or  perform so  well)  in modern  circum(cid:173)
stances.  This  demand  or  interest  provid~s  an  incentive  for  the 
formation  and  maintenance  of  the  voluntary  association. 

It is  characteristic  of  the  traditional  theory  in  all  its  forms  that 
it  assumes  that  participation  in  voluntary  associations  is  virtually 
universal,  and  that  small  groups  and  large  organizations  tend  to 
attract  members  for  the  same  reasons.  The  casual  variant  of  the 
theory  assumed  a  propensity  to  belong  to  groups  without  drawing 
any distinctions  between groups of different  size.  Though the  more 
sophisticated  variant  may  be  credited  with  drawing  a  distinction 
between  those  functions  that  can  best  be  served  by  small  groups 
and those  that can  best be  served by  large associations, it nonetheless 
assumes  that,  when  there  is  a  need  for  a  large  association,  a  large 
association  will tend to  emerge  and  attract  members,  just as  a small 
group will when there is a  need for  a small group. Thus in so far as 
the traditional theory draws any  distinction at all between small and 
large groups, it is  apparently with respect to the scale of the functions 
they  perform, not the extent they  succeed  in  performing these  func(cid:173)
tions or their capacity  to  attract members. It assumes  that small and 
large  groups differ in  degree,  but not in kind. 

But is  this  true?  Is  it  really  the  case  that  small,  primary  groups 
and  large  associations  attract  members  in  the  same  way,  that  they 
are  about  equally  effective  in  performing  their  functions,  or  that 
they  differ  only  in  size  but  not  in  their  basic  character?  This 
traditional  theory  is  called  into  question  by  the  empirical  research 
which shows that the average person does  not in fact typically belong 
to large voluntary associations and that the allegation that the typical 
American  is  a  "joiner"  is  largely  a  myth.ss  It  is  therefore  worth 
38.  Murray  Hausknecht,  Th~  ,oinN"s-A  Sociological  Description  0/  Voluntary 
AS/onation  Membership  in  th~ United  Slates  (New  York:  Bedminster  Press,  1962); 
Micra  Komaravsky,  "The  Voluntary  Associations  of  Urban  Dwellers,"  American 

A  Theory  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

21 

asking  if  it  is  really  true  that  there  is  no  relation  between  the  size 
of a  group  and  its  coherence,  or  effectiveness,  or  appeal  to  potential 
members;  and  whether  there  is  any  relation  between  the  size  of  a 
group and the individual incentives to contribute toward the achieve(cid:173)
ment of  group  goals.  These  are  questions  which  must  be  answered 
before the traditional theory of groups can be properly assessed. What 
needs  to  be  known,  in  the  words  of  the  German  sociologist  Georg 
Simmel,  is  "the  bearing  which  the  number  of  sociated  individuals 
has  upon  the  form  of  social  life." 39 

One obstacle, it would seem, to any  argument that large and small 
groups  operate  according  to  fundamentally  different  principles,  is 
the  fact,  emphasized  earlier,  that  any  group  or  organization,  large 
or small, works for  some collective benefit that by  its  very  nature will 
benefit all  of the  members  of the  group  in  question.  Though  all  of 
the  members  of  the  group  therefore  have  a  common  interest  in 
obtaining  this  collective  benefit,  they  have  no  common  interest  in 
paying the cost of providing that collective good.  Each  would  prefer 
that  the  others  pay  the  entire  cost,  and  ordinarily  would  get  any 
benefit  provided  whether  he  had  borne  part  of  the  cost  or  not.  If 
this  is  a  fundamental  characteristic  of  all  groups  or  organizations 
with an economic purpose, it would seem  unlikely  that large organi(cid:173)
zations  would  be  much different from  small ones,  and  unlikely  that 
there  is  any  more reason  that  a  collective  service  would  be  provided 
for  a  small  group  than  a  large  one.  Still,  one  cannot  help  but  feel 
intuitively  that  sufficiently  small  groups  would  sometimes  provide 
themselves  with  public  goods. 

This question cannot be  answered satisfactorily  without a study of 

the  costs  and  benefits  of alternative  courses  of  action  open  to  indi(cid:173)
viduals  in groups  of  different sizes.  The  next section  of  this  chapter 
contains  such  a study. The nature  of this  question  is  such  that  some 
of the tools of economic analysis must be  used. The following  section 
contains  a  small  amount  of  mathematics  which,  though  extremely 
rudimentary,  might  naturally  still  be  unclear  to  readers  who  have 
never  studied  that  subject.  Some  points  in  the  following  section, 

Sociological  Review,  XI  (December  1946),  686-698;  Floyd  Dotson,  "Patterns  of 
Voluntary  Membership  Among  Working  Class  Families,"  American  Sociological 
Review.  XVI  (October  1951),  687;  John  C.  Scott,  Jr.,  "Membership  and  Participation 
in  Voluntary  Associations,"  American  Sociological  Review,  XXII  (June  1957),  315. 
39.  Georg Simmel,  The Sociology  0/  Georg  Simmel, trans.  Kurt  H. Wolf!  (Glencoe, 

Ill.:  Free  Press  [1950]),  p.  87. 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

22 
moreover,  refer  to  oligopolistic  groups  in  the  marketplace,  and  the 
references to oligopoly may  interest only the economist. Accordingly, 
some  of  the  highlights of  the  following  section  are  explained  in  an 
intuitively  plausible,  though  loose  and imprecise,  way  in  the "non(cid:173)
technical summary" of  section  D, for  the  convenience  of those  who 
might  wish  to  skip  the  bulk  of  the  following  section. 

D.  SMALL  GROUPS 

The  difficulty  of  analyzing  the  relationship  between  group  size 
and the behavior of  the individual in the group  is  due  partly to the 
fact that each individual in a group may place a different value upon 
the  collective  good  wanted  by  his  group.  Each  group  wanting  a 
collective good, moreover,  faces  a different cost  function.  One thing 
that  will  hold  true  in  every  case,  however,  is  that  the  total  cost 
function  will  be  rising,  for  collective  goods  are  surely  like  non(cid:173)
collective goods in that the more of  the good taken, the  higher total 
costs will be. It will, no doubt, also be true in virtually  all  cases  that 
there will be significant initial or fixed costs. Sometimes a group must 
set  up a  formal  organization  before  it  can  obtain  a  collective  good, 
and the cost of establishing an organization entails that the first  unit 
of a collective good obtained  will  be  relatively  expensive.  And even 
when  no organization or coordination  is  required,  the  lumpiness  or 
other  technical  characteristics  of  the  public  goods  themselves  will 
ensure that the  first  unit of a collective  good  will  be  disproportion(cid:173)
ately  expensive.  Any  organization  will  surely  also  find  that  as  its 
demands increase  beyond  a certain  point,  and  come  to  be  regarded 
as  "excessive,"  the resistance  and the  cost  of  additional  units  of  the 
collective  good  rise  disproportionately.  In  short,  cost  (C)  will  be  a 
function  of  the  rate  or  level  (T)  at  which  the  collective  good  is 
obtained  (C = f(T»,  and  the  average  cost  curves  will  have  the 
conventional U  shape. 

One point is  immediately  evident.  If there  is  some  quantity  of  a 
collective good that can be obtained at a cost sufficiently  low in rela(cid:173)
tion to its  benefit that some one person  in the  relevant group would 
gain  from  providing  that  good  all  by  himself,  then  there  is  some 
presumption  that  the  collective  good  will  be  provided.  The  total 
gain  would  then  be  so  large  in  relation  to  the  total  cost  that  some 
one  individual's  share  would  exceed  the  total  cost. 

An individual will get some  share of  the  total  gain  to the  group, 

A  Theory  of Groups  and  Organizations 

23 

a share  that  depends  upon  the  number in  the group and  upon  how 
much  the  individual  will  benefit  from  that  good  in  relation  to  the 
others  in  the group.  The total  gain  to  the group  will  depend  upon 
the  rate  or  level  at  which  the  collective  good  is  obtained  (T), and 
the  "size"  of  the  group  (S,,),  which  depends  not  only  upon  the 
number of  individuals  in the group, but also  on  the  value, of a  unit 
of the collective good to each individual in the group. This could be 
illustrated  most  simply  by  considering  a  group  of  property  owners 
lobbying for a property tax rebate. The total gain to the group would 
depend upon  the "size"  (S,,)  of the  group,  that is,  the total  assessed 
valuation  of all the group property, and the rate  or  level  (T)  of tax 
rebate  per  dollar of  assessed  valuation  of  property.  The  gain  to  an 
individual member of  the group  would depend  upon  the "fraction" 
(F,)  of the group gain he got. 

The group gain  (S"T)  could also be  called  V"' for  "value"  to  the 
group,  and  the  gain  to  the  individual  V"  for  "value"  to  the  indi(cid:173)
vidual.  The "fraction"  (F,)  would  then  equal  V,jV",  and  the gain 
to  the  individual  would  be  F,S"T.  The  advantage  (A,)  that  any 
individual i would get from  obtaining any  amount of the  collective 
or group good  would  be  the gain  to  the  individual  (V,)  minus  the 
cost  (C). 

What  a  group  does  will  depend  on  what  the  individuals  in  that 

group do, and what the individuals do depends on the relative advan(cid:173)
tages  to  them of  alternative  courses  of  action.  So  the  first  thing  to 
do, now  that the relevant  variables  have  been  isolated,  is  to consider 
the  individual  gain  or  loss  from  buying  different  amounts  of  the 
collective  good.  This  will  depend  on  the  way  the  advantage  to  the 
individual  (A, = V, - C)  changes  with  changes  in  T,  that  is,  on 

dA,jdT = dV,jdT - dC jdT. 

For a  maximum,  dAtldT = 0.40  Since  V, = F,SIIT,  and  F,  and  S" 
are,  for  now,  assumed  constant,41 

d(F,S"T)jdT - dCjdT = 0 

F.5" - dCjdT = O. 

40.  The  second-order  conditions  for  a  maximum  must  also  be  satisfied;  that  is, 

d 2AddT2 < 0_ 

41.  In  cases  where F,  and  S.  are  not  constant,  the  maximum  is  given  when: 

d(F,S.T)/dT - dC/dT = 0 

F,S. + F,T(dS./dT) + S,T(dFddT)  - dC/dT = O. 

24 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

This indicates  the  amount  of  the collective  good  that  an  individual 
acting independently would buy, if  he  were  to buy any.  This  result 
can be given  a general, common-sense  meaning. Since  the  optimum 
point  is  found  when 

dA,jdT = dV,jdT - dCjdT = 0 

and since  dV,jdT = F,(dVlljdT) 

F,(dVlljdT) - dCjdT = 0 
F,(dVlljdT) =  dCjdT. 

This  means  that  the  optimal  amount  of  a  collective  good  for  an 
individual  to  obtain,  if  he  should  obtain  any,  is  found  when  the 
rate  of  gain  to  the  group,  multiplied  by  the  fraction  of  the  group 
gain  the  individual  gets,  equals  the  rate  of  increase  of  the  total 
cost  of  the  collective  good.  In  other  words,  the  rate  of  gain  to  the 
group  (dVlljdT)  must exceed  the  rate of increase  in  cost  (dCjdT) 
by  the  same  multiple  that  the  group  gain  exceeds  the  gain  to  the 
individual  concerned  (ljF, = VlljV,).42 
But  what  matters  most  is  not  how  much  of  the  collective  good 
will be  provided  if some  is  provided,  but  rather  whether any  of the 
collective good will be  provided. And it is  clear that, at  the optimum 
point for the individual acting independently, the collective or group 
good  will  presumably  be  provided  if F, > CjVII' 
For if 

then 

F,>  CjVII 
V,jV/I> CjVII 

V,> C. 

Thus, if F, > CjVII}  the  gain  to  an  individual  from  seeing  that  the 
collective good  is  provided  will  exceed  the cost.  This means  there  is 
a  presumption  that  the  collective  good  will  be  provided  if  the  cost 
of the  collective  good  is,  at  the  optimal  point  for  any  individual  in 
the  group,  so  small  in  relation  to  the  gain  of  the  group  as  a  whole 

42.  The  same  point  could  be  made  by  focusing  attention  on  the  individual's  cost 
and  benefit  functions  alone,  and  neglecting  the  gains  to  the  group.  But  this  would 
divert  attention  from  the  main  purpose  of  the  analysis,  which  is  studying  the  rela(cid:173)
tion  between  the  size  of  the  group  and  the  likelihood  that  it  will  be  provided  with 
a  collective  good. 

A  Theory  of Groups  and  Organizations 

25 
from  that  collective  good,  that  the  total  gain  exceeds  the  total  cost 
by  as  much as  or  more than  the  gain  to the group exceeds  the gain 
to  the  individual. 

In  summary,  then,  the  rule  is  that  there  is  a  presumption  that  a 
collective good will be provided if, when the gains to  the group from 
the  collective  good  are  increasing  at  l/F, times  the  rate  of increase 
in  the  total  cost  of  providing  that  good  (that  is,  when  dVfidT = 
l/F,(dC/dT), the  total benefit  to  the group  is  a  larger  multiple  of 
the cost of that good  than the gains to the group are of the gains to 
the  individual  in  question  (that  is,  Vg/C> Vg/V,). 

The degree of generality  of the basic idea in the  foregoing  model 
can  be  illustrated  by  applying  it  to  a  group  of  firms  in  a  market. 
Consider an industry producing a homogeneous product, and assume 
that the firms in the industry independently seek to maximize profits. 
For  simplicity,  suppose  also  that  marginal  costs  of  production  aie 
zero.  In order to avoid  adding any  new  notational  symbols,  and  to 
bring out the  applicability  of  the  foregoing  analysis,  assume  that  T 
now stands for  price,  that SII  now stands for the  physical volume of 
the group's or industry's sales, and S, for the size or physical volume 
of  the  sales  of  firm  i.  F,  still  indicates  the  "fraction"  of  the  total 
accounted  for  by  the  individual  firm  or  member  of  the  group.  It 
indicates now the fraction  of the  total group or industry sales  going 
to  firm i at any  given  moment: F, = S,/SII'  The price,  T,  will affect 
the amount sold by  the industry  to  an  extent given  by  the elasticity 
of demand, E. The elasticity E = - T /Sg(dSg/dT),  and from  this a 
convenient  expression  for  the  slope  of  the  demand  curve,  dSg/dT, 
follows: dSg/dT = -ESg/T. With no production costs, the optimum 
output for  a firm  will  be  given  when: 

dA,/dT = d(S,T)/dT = 0 
S, + T(dS,/dT) = 0 
F.8g + T(dS,/dT) = O. 

Here,  where  it  is  assumed  that  the  firm  acts  independently,  i.e., 
expects  no  reaction  from  other  firms,  dS, = dSg, so 

FtSg + T(dSfidT) = 0 

and since  dSg/dT = -ESp/T, 

F,Sv - T(ESg/T) = 0 

SiFt - E) = O. 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

26 
This  can  happen  only  when  F, = E.  Only  when  the  elasticity  of 
demand  for  the  industry  is  less  than  or  equal to  the  fraction  of  the 
industry's output  supplied  by  a  particular firm  will  that  firm  have 
any incentive to restrict its output. A firm that is deciding whether or 
not to  restrict  its  output in order  to  bring  about  a  higher  price  will 
measure  the cost or loss of  the  foregone  output  against  the  gains  it 
gets  from  the  "collective  good"-the  higher  price.  The  elasticity  of 
demand  is  a  measure  of  this.  If F,  is  equal  to  E  it  means  that  the 
elasticity  of demand  for  the  industry  is  the  same  as  the  proportion 
of  the  output of  the  industry  shared  by  the  firm  in question;  if the 
elasticity  of  demand is,  say,  1/4, it means  that a 1 per  cent  reduction 
in output  will  bring a  4 per  cent  increase  in  price,  which  makes  it 
obvious  that  if  a  given  firm  has  one  fourth  of  the  total  industry 
output it  should  stop  increasing, or  restrict,  its  own output. If there 
were,  say,  a  thousand  firms  of  equal  size  in  an  industry,  the  elas(cid:173)
ticity  of demand for  the industry's  product  would have  to  be  1/1000 
or  less  before  there  would  be  any  restriction  of  output.  Thus  there 
are  no  profits  in  equilibrium  in  any  industry  with  a  really  large 
number of firms.  A  profit-maximizing  firm  will  start  restricting  its 
output, that is,  will start acting in a way  consistent with the  interests 
of  the  industry  as  a  whole,  when the  rate  at  which  the  gain  to  the 
group  increases,  as  more  T  (a  higher  price)  is  provided,  is  l/Fj 
times as great as  the  rate  at which the total cost of  output restriction 
increases.  This  is  the  same  criterion  for  group-oriented  behavior 
used  in the more general case  explained  earlier. 

This  analysis  of  a  market  is  identical  with  that  offered  by  Cour(cid:173)
not.43  This should  not  be  surprising,  for  Cournot's theory  is  essen(cid:173)
tially  a  special  case  of  a  more  general  theory  of  the  relationship 
between the interests of the  member of  a group  and of the  interests 
of the group  as  a  whole.  The Cournot  theory  can  be  regarded  as  a 
special  case  of  the  analysis  developed  here.  The  Cournot  solution 
thus  boils  down to  the common-sense  statement  that a  firm  will  act 
to  keep  up  the price  of  the  product  its  industry  sells  only  when  the 
total cost  of  keeping  up the  price  is  not  more  than  its  share  of  the 
industry's  gain  from  the  higher  price.  The  Cournot  theory  is,  like 
the  analysis  of  group  action  outside  the  market,  a  theory  that  asks 

43.  Augustin  Cournot,  Reuarchu  into  the  Mathematical  Principles  of  the  Theory 
of  Wealth,  trans.  Nathaniel  T.  Bacon  (N~w York:  Macmillan,  1897),  ~sp~cially chap. 
vii,  pp.  79-90. 

A  Theory  of Groups  and  Organizations 

27 

when  it is  in  the  interest of  an  individual unit in  a  group  to  act  in 
the  interest  of  the  group  as  a  whole. 

The Cournot case is in one respect simpler than the group situation 
outside the marketplace that is the main concern of this study. When 
a group seeks an ordinary collective good,  rather than a higher price 
through output restriction, it finds,  as  the opening paragraph of this 
section argued, that the first  unit of the collective good obtained  will 
be more expensive per unit than some subsequent units of the good. 
This is because of the lumpiness and other technical characteristics of 
collective goods, and because it may sometimes be  necessary  to create 
an organization to obtain the collective  good.  This calls  to  attention 
the fact that there are two distinct  questions  that an  individual in a 
nonmarket group must consider. One is  whether the total  benefit he 
would get from providing some amount of the collective good would 
exceed  the total cost of that amount of the good. The other question 
is how much of the collective good he should provide, if some should 
be  provided,  and  the  answer  here  depends  of  course  on  the  rela(cid:173)
tionship between  marginal,  rather  than  total,  costs  and  benefits. 

There  are  similarly  also  two  distinct  questions  that  must  be 
answered  about  the  group  as  a  whole.  It  is  not  enough  to  know 
whether a small group will provide itself with a collective good; it is 
also necessary to determine whether the amount of the collective good 
that  a  small  group  will  obtain,  if  it  obtains  any,  will  tend  to  be 
Pareto-optimal  for  the  group  as  a  whole.  That  is,  will  the  group 
gain  be  maximized?  The optimal  amoum  of  a  collective  good  for 
a group as a whole to obtain, if it should obtain any,  would be  given 
when  the gain  to  the  group  was  increasing  at  the  same  rate  as  the 
cost  of  the  collective  good,  i.e.,  when  dVg/dT = dC/dT.  Since,  as 
shown earlier, each  individual in the group would have an  incentive 
to  provide  more  of  the  collective  good  until  F,(dVg/dT = dC/dT, 
and  since  IF, = 1,  it  would  at  first  glance  appear  that  the  sum  of 
what  the  individual  members  acting  independently  would  provide 
would  add  up  to the group optimum. It would  also  seem  that  each 
individual  in  the group  would  then  bear  a  fraction,  F"  of  the  total 
burden  or  cost,  so  that  the  burden  of  providing  the  public  good 
would be  shared in the  "right" way  in the  sense  that  the cost  would 
be  shared  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  benefits. 

But  this  is  not so.  Normally,  the  provision  of  the  collective  good 
will be  strikingly suboptimal and the distribution of the  burden will 

28 

The Logic 0/  Collective  Action 

be  highly arbitrary. This is because the amount of the collective good 
that  the  individual obtains  for  himself  will  automatically  also  go  to 
others.  It  follows  from  the  very  definition  of  a  collective  good  that 
an individual cannot exclude the others in the group from the benefits 
of  that  amount  of  the  public  good  that  he  provides  for  himself.44 
This means that no one in the group will have an incentive independ(cid:173)
ently  to  provide  any  of  the  collective  good  once  the  amount  that 
would  be  purchased  by  the  individual in  the group  with  the  largest 
Fi  was  available.  This  suggests  that,  just  as  there  is  a  tendency  for 
large  groups  to  fail  to  provide  themselves  with  any  collective  good 
at  all,  so  there  is  a tendency  in  small  groups  toward  a  suboptimal 
provision  0/  collective  goods.  The  suboptimality  will  be  the  more 
serious  the  smaller  the  F,  of  the  "largest"  individual  in  the  group. 
Since  the larger  the  number in  the  group,  other  things  equal,  the 
smaller the F;s will be,  the more individuals in  the group,  the more 
serious  the  suboptimality  will  be.  Clearly  then  groups  with  larger 
numbers  of  members  will  generally  perform  less  efficiently  than 
groups  with  smaller  numbers  of  members. 

It is  not,  however,  sufficient  to  consider  only  the  number  of  indi(cid:173)

viduals  or units  in a  group,  for  the  Fi  of  any  member  of  the  group 
will depend  not only on how many members there  are  in the group, 
but  also  on  the  "size"  (S,)  of  the  individual  member,  that  is,  the 
extent to which  he  will  be benefited  by  a given  level  of  provision  of 
the  collective  good.  An owner of vast  estates  will  save  more  from  a 
given  reduction  in  property  taxes  than  the  man  with  only  a  modest 
cottage, and other things equal will have a larger F,.45  A  group com-

44.  In  the  rest  of  this  section  it  is  convenient  and  helpful  to  assume  that  every 
member  of  the  group  receives  the  same  amount  of  the  public  good.  This  is  in  fact 
the  case  whenever  the  collective  good  is  a  "pure  public  good" 
in  Samuelson's  sense. 
This  assumption  is,  however,  more  stringent  than  is  usually  necessary.  A  public  good 
may  be  consumed  in  unequal  amounts  by  rlifferent  individuals,  yet  be  a  full  public 
good  in  the  sense  that  one  individual's  consumption  does  not  in  any  way  diminish 
that  of  another.  And  even  when  additional  consumption  by  one  individual  does  lead 
to  marginal  reductions  in  the  amount  available  to  others,  the  qualitative  conclusions 
that  there  will  be  suboptimality  and  disproportionate  burden  sharing  still  hold. 

45.  Differences  in  size  con  also  have  some  importance  in  market  situations.  The 
large  firm  in  a  market  will  get  a  larger  fraction  of  the  total  benefit  from  any  higher 
price  than  a  small  firm,  and  will  therefore  have  more  incentive  to  restrict  output. 
This  suggests  that  the  competition  of  a  few  large  firms  among  the  many  small  ones, 
contrary  to  some  opinions,  can  lead  to  a  serious  misallocation  of  resources.  For  a 
different  view  on  this  subject,  see  Willard  D.  Arant,  "The  Competition  of  the  Few 
among  the  Many,"  Quarterly  Journal  01  ECOIlOmjcs,  LXX  (August  1956),  327-345. 

A  Theory  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

29 

posed  of  members  of  unequal  Si'  and,  therefore,  unequal  Ft,  will 
show less of a tendency toward suboptima1ity  (and be  more  likely  to 
provide itself with some amount of a collective good)  than an  other(cid:173)
wise  identical  group composed of members  of  equal  size. 

Since no one has  an incentive to  provide any  more of the collective 
good, once  the member with  the largest F. has obtained  the  amount 
he  wants, it is  also  true  that  the  distribution  of  the  burden  of  pro(cid:173)
viding the public good in a small group  will  not be  in  proportion  to 
the benefits conferred  by  the  collective  good.  The member  with  the 
largest F.  will bear a disproportionate  share of the  burden. 46  Where 
small  groups  with  common interests  are  concerned,  then,  there  is  a 
systematic  tendency  for  "exploitation" 47  of  the  great  by  the  small! 
The  behavior  of  small  groups  interested  in  collective  goods  can 
sometimes  be  quite  complex-much  more  complex  than  the  pre(cid:173)
ceding  paragraphs  would  suggest.48  There  are  certain  institutional 

46.  The discussion  in  the  text  is  much  too  brief  and  simple  to  do  full  justice  even 
to  some  of  the  most  common  situations.  In  what  is  perhaps  the  most  common  case, 
where  the  collective  good  is  not  a  money  payment  to  each  member  of  some  group, 
and  not  something  that  each  individual  in  the  group  can  sell  for  money,  the  individ(cid:173)
uals  in  the  group  must  compare  the  additional  cost  of  another  unit  of  the  collective 
good  with  the  additional  "'utility" 
they  would  get  from  an  additional  unit  of  that 
good.  They  could  not,  as  the  argument  in  the  text  assumes,  merely  compare  a  money 
cost  with  a  money  return,  and  indifference  curves  would  accordingly  also  have  to 
be  used  in  the  analysis.  The  marginal  rate  of  substitution  would  be  affected  not  only 
by  the  fact  that  the  taste  for  additional  units  of  the  collective  good  would  diminish 
as  more  of  the  good  was  consumed,  but  also  by  the  income  effects.  The  income 
effects  would  lead  a  group  member  that  had  sacrificed  a  disproportionate  amount  of 
his  income  to  obtain  the  public  good  to  value  his  income  more  highly  than  he 
would  have  done  had  he  got  the  collective  good  free  from  others  in  the  group. 
Conversely,  those  who  had  not  borne  any  of  the  burden  of  providing  the  collective 
good  they  enjoyed  would  find  their  real  incomes  greater,  and  unless  the  collective 
good  were  an  inferior  good,  this  gain  in  real  income  would  strengthen  their  demand 
for  the  collective  good.  These  income  effects  would  tend  to  keep  the  largest  member 
of  the  group  from  bearing  all  of  the  burden  of  the  collective  good  (as  he  would  in 
the  much  too  simple  case  considered  in  the  text).  I  am  thankful  to  Richard  Zeck(cid:173)
hauser  for  bringing  the  importance  of  income  effects  in  this  context  to  my  attention. 
47.  The  moral  overtones  of  the  word  "exploitation"  are  unfortunate;  no  general 

moral  conclusions  can  follow  from  a  purely  logical  analysis.  Since  the  word  "'exploita(cid:173)
tion"  is,  however,  commonly  used  to  describe  situations  where  there  is  a  dispropor(cid:173)
tion  between  the  benefits  and  sacrifices  of  different  people,  it  would  be  pedantic 
to  use  a  different  word  here. 

48.  For  one  thing,  the  argument  in  the  text  assumes  independent  behavior,  and 
thus  neglects  the  strategic  interaction  or  bargaining  that  is  possible  in  small  groups. 
As  later  parts  of  this  chapter  will  show,  strategic  interaction  is  usually  much  less 
important  in  nonmarket  groups  seeking  collective  goods  than  it  is  among  gruups 
of  firms  in  the  marketplace.  And  even  when  there  is  bargaining,  it  will  often  be 

30 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

arrangements and  behavioral  assumptions  that will  not  always  lead 
to  the suboptimality  and  disproportionality  that  the preceding  para(cid:173)
graphs have described. Any adequate analysis of the tendency toward 
suboptimal provision of collective goods, and toward disproportionate 
sharing of the burdens of  providing them,  would be  too  long  to  fit 
comfortably  into  this  study,  which  is  concerned  mainly  with  large 
groups,  and  brings  in  small  groups  mainly  for  purposes  of  com(cid:173)
parison and contrast. The problem of small groups seeking collective 
goods is of some importance, both theoretically 49  and practically, and 
has  not been adequately  treated in  the literature.  It will  accordingly 
be analyzed in more detail in forthcoming articles. The Nontechnical 
Summary of this section  will list  it few  of  the specific cases  that this 
approach  to small groups and organizations can  be  used  to  study. 

The necessary  conditions for  the  optimal provision  of  a  collective 
good, through the voluntary and independent action of the members 
of a  group, can,  however,  be  stated  very  simply.  The marginal  cost 
of  additional  units of  the  collective  good  must be  shared  in  exactly 
the same  proportion  as  the  additional  benefits.  Only  if  this  is  done 
will each member  find  that  his own marginal costs  and  benefits  are 

the  case  that  there  will  be  a  disparity  of  bargaining  power  that  will  lead  to  about 
the  same  results  as  are  described  in  the  text.  When  a  group  member  with  a  large  F, 
bargains  with a  member  with  a  small  F"  all  he  can  do  is  threaten  the  smaller  mem(cid:173)
ber  by  saying,  in  effect,  "If you  do  not  provide  more  of  the  collective  good,  I  will 
provide  less  myself,  and  you  will  then  be  worse  off  than  you  are  now."  But  when 
the  large  member  restricts  his  purchase  of  the  public  good,  he  will  suffer  more  than 
the  smaller  member,  simply  because  his  F,  is  greater.  The  large  member's  threat  is 
thus  not  apt  to  be  credible.  Another  factor  that  works  in  the  same  direction  is  that 
the  maximum  amount  of  collective  good  provision  that  a  successful  bargain  c~n 
extract from  the  small  member  is  less  than the amount a  successful  bargain can  bring 
forth  from  the  large  member.  This  means  that  the  large  member  may  not  gain 
enough  even  from  successful  bargaining  to  justify  the  risks  or  other costs  of  bargain(cid:173)
ing,  while  the  small  member by  contrast  finds  that  the  gain  from  a  successful  bargain 
is  large  in  relation  to  his  costs  of  bargaining.  The  bargaining  problem  is  of  course 
more  complex  than  this,  but  it  is  nonetheless  clear  that  bargaining  will  usually  lead 
toward the  same  results  as  the  forces  explained  in  the  text. 

49.  Erik  Lindahl's  famous  "voluntary  theory  of  public  exchange"  can,  I  believe, 
usefully  be  amended  and  expanded  with  the  aid  of  the  analysis  adumbrated  in  the 
text.  I  am  thankful  to  Richard  Musgrave  for  bringing  to  my  attention  the  fact  that 
Lindahl's  theory  and  the  approach  used  in  this  study  must  be  closely  related.  He 
sees  this  relationship  in  a  different  way,  however.  For  analyses  of  Lindahl's  theory 
see  Richard  Musgrave,  "The  Voluntary  Exchange  Theory  of  Public  Economy," 
Quarterly  fournal  of  Economics,  LIII  (February  1939),  213-237;  Leif  Johansen, 
"Some  Notes  on  the  Lindahl  Theory  of  Determination  of  Public  Expenditures," 
International  Economic  R~vi~w,  IV  (September  1963),  346-358:  John  G.  Head. 
"Lindahl's  Thcory  of  the  Budget,"  Finanzarchiv,  XXIII  (October  1964),  421-454. 

A  Theory  of Groups  and  Organizations 

31 
equal  at  the  same  time  that  the  total  marginal  cost  equals  the  total 
or  aggregate  marginal  benefit.  If  marginal  costs  are  shared  in  any 
other  way,  the  amount  of  collective  good  provided  will  be  sub(cid:173)
optimal.~o It might seem  at  first  glance  that  if  some  cost  allocations 
lead  to  a suboptimal  provision of a collective  good,  then  some  other 
cost  allocations  would  lead  to  a  supraoptimal  supply  of  that  good; 
but  this  is  not so.  In any  group  in  which  participation  is  voluntary, 
the  member  or members  whose  shares  of  the  marginal  cost  exceed 
their  shares  of  the  additional  benefits  will  stop  contributing  to  the 
achievement  of  the  collective  good  before  the  group  optimum  has 
been  reached. And there is  no conceivable  cost-sharing  arrangement 
in  which some member  does  not have  a  marginal cost  greater than 
his  share  of  the  marginal  benefit,  except  the  one  in  which  every 
member  of  the  group  shares  marginal  costs  in  exactly  the  same 
proportion  in  which  he  shares  incremental  benefits.51 

50.  Tht:rt:  is  an  illustration  of  this  point  in  many  farm  tt:nancy  agreemt:nts,  where 
the  landlord  and  tenant  often  share  the  produce  of  the  crop  in  some  prt:arranged 
proportion.  The  farm's  output  can  then  be  regarded  as  a  public  good  to  the  landlord 
and  tenant.  Often  the  tenant  will  provide  all  of  the  labor,  machinery,  and  fertilizer, 
and  the  landlord  will  maintain  all  of  the  buildings,  drainage,  ditches,  etc.  As  some 
agricultural  economists  have  rightly  pointed  out,  such  arrangemt:nts  are  inefficient, 
for  the  tenant  will  use  labor,  machinery,  and  fertilizer  only  up  to  the  point  whert: 
the  marginal  cost  of  these  factors  of  production  equals  the  marginal  return  from  his 
share  of  the  crop.  Similarly,  the  landlord  will  provide  a  suboptimal  amount  of  the 
factors  he  provides.  The  only  way  in  which  this  suboptimal  provision  of  the  factors 
can  be  prevented  in  a  share-tenancy  is  by  having  the  landlord  and  tenant  share  the 
costs  of  each  of  the  (variable)  factors  of  production  in  the  same  proportion  in  which 
they  share  the  output.  Perhaps  thIS  built-in  inefficiency  in  most  share-tenancy  agree(cid:173)
ments  helps  account  for  the  observation  that  in  many  areas  where  farmers  do  not  own 
the  land  they  farm,  land  reform  is  necessary  to  increase  agricultural  efficiency.  See 
Earl  O.  Heady  and  E.  W.  Kehrberg,  Effect  01  Share  and  caoh  Renting  on  Farming 
Efficiency  (Iowa  Agricultural  Experiment  Station  Bulletin  386),  and  Earl  O.  Ht:ady, 
Economics  of  Agricultural  Production  and  Resource  Use  (New  York:  Prentice-HaIl, 
1952),  esp.  pp.  592  and  620. 

51.  A  similar  argument  could  sometimes  be  used  to  help  explain  tht:  common 

observation  that  there  is  "public  squalor"  midst  "private  splendor,"  that  is,  a  sub(cid:173)
optimal  supply  of  public  goods.  Such  an  argument  would  be  relevant  at  least  in 
those  situations  where  proposed  Pareto-optimal  public  expenditures  benefit  a  group  of 
people  smaller  than  the  group  that  would  be  taxed  to  pay  for  these  expenditures. 
The  point  that  even  Pareto-optimal  public  expenditures  usually  benefit  groups  of 
people  smaller  than  the  group  taxed  to  pay  for  these  expenditures  was  suggested  to 
me  by  Julius  Margolis"  useful  paper  on  "The  Structure  of  Government  and  Public 
in  American  Economic  Review:  Papers  and  Proceeding$,  LIV  {May 
Investment," 
1964),236-247.  See  my  "Discussion"  of  Margolis'  paper  (and  others)  in  the  same 
issue  of  the  American  Economic  Review  (pp.  250-251)  for  a  suggestion  of  a  way 
in  which  a  model  of  the  kind  developed  in  this  study  can  be  used  to  explain  private 

A  Theory  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

33 

vide  themselves  with some  amount of a  collective good  through the 
voluntary  and  rational  action  of  one  or  more  of  their  members.  In 
this  they  are  distinguished  from  really  large  groups.  There  are  two 
things  to  determine in  finding out whether there is  any  presumption 
that  a  given  group  will  voluntarily  provide  itself  with  a  collective 
good.  First,  the  optimal  amount  of  the  collective  good  for  each 
individual  to  buy,  if  he  is  to  buy  any,  must  be  discovered;  this  is 
given  when Fi( dVu/dT) =  dCjdT.52  Second,  it must be  determined 
whether  any  member  or  members  of the  group  would  find  at  that 
individual optimum that the benefit to  the group from the collective 
good  exceeded  the  total  cost  by  more  than it exceeded the  member's 
own  benefit  from  that  collective  good;  that  is,  whether Fi  > CjVg • 
The argument  may  be  stated  yet  more  simply  by  saying  that,  if at 
any  level  of  purchase  of the  collective  good,  the  gain  to  the  group 
exceeds  the  total  cost  by  more  than  it exceeds  the gain  to  any  indi(cid:173)
vidual,  then  there  is  a presumption  that  the collective  good  will  be 
provided,  for  then  the  gain  to  the  individual  exceeds  the  total  cost 
of  providing  the collective  good  to  the  group.  This  is  illustrated  in 
the  accompanying  figure,  where  an  individual  would  presumably 
be  better  off  for  having  provided  the  collective  good,  whether  he 
provided amount V or amount  W or any  amount in between. If any 
amount  of  the  collective  good  between  V  and  W  is  obtained,  even 
if  it  is  not  the  optimal  amount  for  the  individual,  Fi  will  exceed 
CjVg• 

Nontechnical summary of Section D 

The  technical  part  of  this  section  has  shown  that  certain  small 
groups  can  provide  themselves  with collective goods  without relying 
on  coercion  or  any  positive  inducements  apart  from  the  collective 
good itself.53  This is  because in some small groups each of the mem-

52.  If Fi  is  not a  constant,  this  individual  optimum  is  given  when: 

F;(dVg/dT) + Vg(dFi/dT) =dC/dT. 

53.  I  am  indebted  to  Professor  John  Rawls  of  the  Department  of  Philosophy  at 
Harvard  University  for  reminding  me  of  the  fact 
the  philosopher  David 
Hume  sensed  that  small  groups  could  achieve  common  purposes  but  large  groups 
could  not.  Hume's  argument  is  however  somewhat  different  from  my  own.  In 
A  Treatise  0/  HI/man  Nature,  Everyman  edition  (London:  J.  M.  Dent,  1952),  H,  239, 
Hume  wrote:  "There  is  no  quality  in  human  nature  which  causes  more  fatal  errors 
in  our  conduct,  than  that  which  leads  us  to  prefer  whatever  is  present  to  the  distant 
and  remote,  and  makes  us  desire  objects  more  according  to  their  situation  than  their 
intrinsic  value.  Two  neighbours  may  agree  to  drain  a  meadow,  which  they  possess 

that 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

34 
bers,  or  at  least  one  of  them,  will  find  that  his  personal  gain  from 
having the  collective  good  exceeds  the  total  cost  of  providing  some 
amount  of  that  collective  good;  there  are  members  who  would  be 
better  off  if  the  collective  good  were  provided,  even  if  they  had  to 
pay  the  entire  cost  of  providing  it  themselves,  than  they  would  be 
if  it  were  not  provided.  In  such  situations  there  is  a  presumption 
that the collective good  will  be  provided. Such  a  situation  will  exist 
only  when the  benefit to  the group from  having the  collective  good 
exceeds the total cost by more than it exceeds the gain to one or more 
individuals  in  the  group.  Thus,  in  a  very  small  group,  where  each 
member  gets  a  substantial  proportion  of  the  total  gain  simply  be(cid:173)
cause  there  are  few  others  in the  group,  a  collective  good  can often 
be provided by the voluntary, self-interested action of the members of 
the group. In  smaller groups  marked  by  considerable  degrees  of  in(cid:173)
equality-that is,  in groups  of  members of unequal  "size"  or  extent 
of interest in the collective good-there is  the greatest likelihood that 
a collective good  will be  provided;  for  the  greater  the interest in the 
collective good of any  single member, the  greater the likelihood that 
that member will get such a significant proportion of the total benefit 
from the collective good that he  will gain from seeing that  the good 
is  provided,  even  if he  has  to  pay  all  of  the  cost  himself. 

Even  in the smallest groups, however, the collective  good  will  not 
ordinarily  be  provided  on  an  optimal  scale.  That  is  to  say,  the 
members  of  the  group  will  not  provide  as  much  of  the  good  as  it 
would  be  in  their  common  interest  to  provide.  Only  certain  special 

in  common:  because  it  is  easy  for  them  to  know  each  other's  mind;  and  each  must 
perceive,  that the  immediate  consequence  of  his  failing  in  his  part,  is  the  abandoning 
of  the  whole  project.  But  it  is  very  difficult,  and  indeed  impossible,  that  a  thousand 
persons  should  agree  in  any  such  action;  it  being  difficult  for  them  to  concert  so 
complicated  a  design,  and  still  more  difficult  for  them  to  execute  it;  while  each  seeks 
a  pretext  to free  himself  of  the trouble  and expense,  and  would  lay  the  whole  burden 
on  others.  Political  society  easily  remedies  both  these  inconveniences.  Magistrates 
find  an  immediate  interest  in  the  interest  of  any  considerable  part  of  their  subjects. 
They  need  consult  nobody  but  themselves  to  form  any  scheme  for  promoting  that 
interest.  And  as  the  failure  of  anyone  piece  in  the  execution  is  connected,  though 
not  immediately,  with  the  failure  of  the  whole,  they  prevent  that  failure,  because  they 
find  no  interest  in  it,  either  immediate  or  remote.  Thus,  bridges  are  built,  harbours 
opened,  ramparts  raised,  canals  formed,  fleets  equipped,  and  armies  disciplined, 
everywhere,  by  the  care  of  government,  which,  though  composed  of  men  subject  to 
all  human  infirmities,  becomes,  by  one  of  the  finest  and  most  subtile  inventions 
imaginable.  a  composition  which  is 
in  some  measure  exempted  from  all  these 
infinnities. " 

A  TheQ1'yof  Groups  and  Organizations 

35 

institutional  arrangements  will  give  the  individual  members  an  in(cid:173)
centive  to  purchase  the  amounts  of  the  collective  good  that  would 
add up to the amount that would be in the best interest of the group 
as a whole. This tendency toward suboptimality is due to the fact that 
a collective good  is,  by  definition,  such  that other  individuals  in the 
group cannot be  kept from  consuming it once  any  individual  in the 
group has  provided it for himself. Since  an  individual  member thus 
gets  only  part of the benefit of any  expenditure he  makes  to  obtain 
more of  the collective  good,  he  will  discontinue  his  purchase of the 
collective good  before the optimal  amount for  the group as  a  whole 
has  been  obtained.  In  addition,  the  amounts  of  the  collective  good 
that a  member  of the  group  receives  free  from  other  members  will 
further reduce his incentive to provide more of that good at his own 
expense.  Accordingly,  the  larger  the  group,  the  farther  it  will  fall 
short of providing an  optimal amount of a collective  good. 

This suboptimality or inefficiency  will be  somewhat less  serious in 
groups  composed  of  members  of  greatly  different  size  or  interest 
in  the  collective  good.  In such  unequal  groups,  on  the  other  hand, 
there  is  a  tendency  toward  an  arbitrary  sharing  of  the  burden  of 
providing the collective good. The largest member, the member who 
would on his  own provide the largest amount of the collective good, 
bears a disproportionate share of the burden of providing the collec(cid:173)
tive good. The smaller member by  definition  gets  a smaller  fraction 
of the benefit of any  amount of the collective good  he  provides  than 
a  larger  member,  and  therefore  has  less  incentive  to  provide  addi(cid:173)
tional  amounts  of  the  collective  good.  Once  a  smaller  member  has 
the amount of the collective good he gets free  from  the largest mem(cid:173)
ber, he has  more than he would have  purchased for  himself, and has 
no incentive to obtain any of the  collective good at his own expense. 
In  small  groups  with  common  interests  there  is  accordingly  a  sur(cid:173)
prising tendency  for  the "exploitation"  of the great  by  the small. 

The  argument  that  small  groups  providing  themselves  with  col(cid:173)
lective  goods  tend  to  provide  suboptimal  quantities  of  these  goods, 
and  that  the  burdens  of  providing  them  are  borne  in  an  arbitrary 
and  disproportionate  way,  does  not  hold  in  all  logically  possible 
situations. Certain institutional or procedural arrangements  can  lead 
to different outcomes. The subject cannot be  analyzed adequately in 
any brief discussion. For this  reason,  and because  the  main focus  of 
this book is on large groups, many of the complexities of small-group 

36 

The Logic of Collective Action 

behavior have been  neglected in  this study. An argument of the kind 
just outlined  could,  however,  fit  some  important  practical  situations 
rather  well,  and  may  serve  the  purpose  of  suggesting  that  a  more 
detailed  analysis  of  the  kind  outlined  above  could  help  to  explain 
the  apparent  tendency  for  large  countries  to  bear  disproportionate 
shares of the  burdens of multinational organizations, like the United 
Nations  and  NATO,  and  could  help  to  explain  some  of  the  popu(cid:173)
larity of neutralism among smaller countries. Such an analysis  would 
also  tend  to  explain  the  continual  complaints  that  international 
organizations  and  alliances  are  not  given  adequate  (optimal) 
amounts  of  resources. 5
'  It  would  also  suggest  that  neighboring  local 
governments in metropolitan areas  that provide collective goods  (like 
commuter  roads  and  education)  that  benefit  individuals  in  two  or 
more  local  government  jurisdictions  would  tend  to  provide  inade(cid:173)
quate  amounts  of  these  services,  and  that  the  largest  local  gov(cid:173)
ernment  (e.g.,  the  one  representing  the  central  city)  would  bear 
disproportionate  shares  of  the  burdens  of  providing  them.5~  An 
analysis of the foregoing type might, finally,  provide some additional 
insight into the phenomenon of price leadership, and particularly the 
possible  disadvantages  involved  in  being  the  largest  firm  in  an 
industry. 

The most important single point about small groups in  the present 
context,  however,  is  that  they  may  very  well  be  able  to  provide 
themselves  with  a  collective  good  simply  because  of  the  attraction 
of  the  collective  good  to  the  individual  members.  In  this,  small 
groups  differ  from  larger ones.  The  larger  a group  is,  the  farther  it 
will  fall  short of  obtaining an  optimal  supply  of any  collective good, 
and  the  less  likely  that  it  will  act  to  obtain  even  a  minimal  amount 
of such  a good.  In  short,  the  larger the group, the  less  it will  further 
its common interests. 

E.  "EXCLUSIVE"  AND  "INCLUSIVE"  GROUPS 

The movement in  and out of the group must no  longer be ignored. 
This  is  an  important  matter;  for  industries  or  market groups  differ 
54.  Some  of  the  complexities  of  behavior  in  small  groups  are  treated  in  Mancur 
Olson,  Jr.,  and  Richard  Z"khauser,  "An  Economic  Theory  of  Alliances,"  R~vi~w of 
Econom;C$  and  Stat;st;a,  XLVIII  (August  1966),266-279,  and  in  "Collective  Goods, 
Comparative  Advantage,  and  Alliance  Efficiency,"  in  [ssu<'J  0/  D~fen.<e Economia  (A 
Conference  of  the  Universities·National  Bureau-Committee  for  Economics  Research), 
Roland  McKean,  ed.,  (New  York:  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  1967), 
pp.  25-48.  [Footnote added  in  1970.) 

55.  I  am  indebted  to  Alan  Williams  of  York  University  in  England,  whose  study 
of  local  government  brought  the  importance  of  these  sorts  of  spillovers  among  local 
govenments  to  my  attention. 

A  Theory  of Groups  and  Organizations 

37 

fundamentally  from  nonmarket  groups  in  their  attitudes  toward 
movement  in  and  out of  the group.  The firm  in  an  industry  wants 
to  keep new firms from coming in to  share the  market and  wants as 
many  as  possible  of  those  firms  already  in  the  industry  to  leave  the 
industry. It wants the  group of firms  in  the  industry to  shrink  until 
there  is  preferably  only  one firm  in the  group: its  ideal  is  a  monop(cid:173)
oly.  Thus  the  firms  in  a given  market  are  competitors  or  rivals.  In 
nonmarket  groups  or  organizations  seeking  a  collective  good  the 
opposite  is  true. Usually  the larger the  number available to  share the 
benefits  and  costs  the  better.  An  increase  in  the  size  of  the  group 
does  not  bring competition  to  anyone,  but  may  lead  to  lower  costs 
for those already in the group. The truth of this view is evident from 
everyday  observation.  Whereas  firms  in  a  market  lament  any  in(cid:173)
crease  in  competition,  associations  that  supply  collective  goods  in 
nonmarket situations almost always  welcome  new members. Indeed, 
such  organizations  sometimes  attempt  to  make  membership  com(cid:173)
pulsory. 

Why  is  there  this  difference  between  the  market  and  nonmarket 
groups  which  previous  sections  of  this  chapter  have  shown  to  have 
striking  similarities?  If  the  businessman  in  the  market,  and  the 
member of  the lobbying organization, are  alike in  that each  of  them 
finds  that  the  benefits  of  any  effort  made  to  achieve  group  goals 
would  accrue  mostly  to  other  members  of  the  group,  then  why  are 
they  so  much  different  where  entry  and  exit  from  the  group  are 
concerned?  The answer  is  that  in a  market  situation  the  "collective 
good"-the higher  price-is  such  that if one firm  sells  more  at  that 
price, other firms must sell less,  so that the benefit it provides is  fixed 
in  supply;  but  tn  nonmarket situations  the  benefit from  a  collective 
good  is  not fixed  in supply.  Only so  many  units of a  product can be 
sold  in any  given  market  without  driving  down  the  price,  but  any 
number  of  people  can  join  a  lobbying  organization  without  neces(cid:173)
sanly reducing the benefits for others.56  Usually in a market situation 
what onc  firm  captures  another firm  cannot  obtain;  essentially  in  a 
nonmarket  situation  what one  consumes  another  may  also  enjoy.  If 
a firm in a  market situation prospers,  it becomes  a  more  formidable 
rival;  but  if  an  individual  in  a  nonmarket  group  prospers,  he  may 
56.  In  a  social  club  that  gives  members  status  because  it  is  "exclusive,"  the  col(cid:173)

lective  good  in  question  is  like  a  supracompetitive  price  in  a  market,  not  like  the 
normal  nonmarket  situation.  If  the  top  "400"  were  to  become  the  top  "4000,"  the 
benefits  to  the  entrants  would  be  offset  by  the  losses  of  old  members,  who  would 
have  traded  an  exalted  social  connection  for  one  that  might  be  only  respectable. 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

38 
well  then have  an  incentive  to  pay  a  larger share  of the  cost  of  the 
collective  good. 

Because  of  the fixed  and  thus  limited  amount  of  the benefit  that 
can  be  derived from  the "collective  good"-the higher  price-in the 
market  situation,  which  leads  the  members  of  a  market  group  to 
attempt to reduce the size of their group, this sort of collective good 
will  here  be  called  an  "exclusive  collective  good." 117  Because  the 
supply  of  collective  goods  in  nonmarket  situations,  by  contrast, 
automatically  expands  when the group  expands,  this  sort  of  public 
good  should  be  called  an  "inclusive  collective  good." 118 

57.  This  usage  of  the  idea  of  the  collective  good  is,  to  be  sure,  in  some  respects 
over·broad,  in  that  the  collective-good  concept  is  not  needed  to  analyze  market 
behavior;  other  theories  are  usually  better  for  that  purpose.  But  it  is  helpful  in  this 
particular  context  to  treat  a  supracompetitive  price  as  a  special  type  of  collective 
good.  It  is  a  useful  expositional  technique  for  bringing  out  parallels  and  contrasts 
between  market  and  nonmarket  situations  with  respect  to  the  relationships  between 
individual  interests  and  group-oriented  action.  I  hope  that  in  the  following  pages 
it  will  also  offer  some  insight  into  organizations that  have  functions  both  inside  and 
outside  the  market,  and  into  the  extent  of  bargaining  in  market  and  nonmarket 
groups. 

58.  There  are  some  interesting  parallels  between  my  concepts  of  "exclusive"  and 
"inclusive"  collective  goods  and  some  recent  work  by  other  economists.  There  is, 
first,  a  relationship  between  these  concepts  and  John  Head's  previously  cited  article 
on  "Public  Goods  and  Public  Policy"  (Public  Finance,  XVII,  197-219).  I  did  not 
understand  all  of  the  implications  of  my  discussion  of  inclusive  and  collective  goods 
until  I  had  read  all  of  Head's  article.  As  I  now  see  it,  these  concepts  can  be  explained 
in  terms  of  his  distinction  between  the  two  defining  characteristics  of  the  traditional 
public  good:  infeasibility  of  exclusion  and  jointness  of  supply.  My  exclusive  collective 
good  is  then  a  good  such  that,  at  least  within  some  given  group,  exclusion  is  not 
feasible,  but  at  the  same  time  such  that  there  is  no  jointness  of  supply  whatever,  so 
that  the  members  of  the  group  hope  that  others  can  be  kept  out  of  the  group.  My 
inclusive  collective  good  is  also  such  that  exclusion  is  infeasible,  at  least  within 
some  given  group,  but  it  is  however  also  characterized  by  at  least  some  considerable 
degree  of  jointness  in  supply,  and  this  accounts  for  the  fact  that  additional  members 
can enjoy  the good  with  little or no reduction in the  consumption of  the old  members. 
There  is,  second,  a  relationship  between  my  inclusive-exclusive  distinction  and  a 
paper  by  James  M.  Buchanan  entitled  "An  Economic  Theory  of  Clubs"  (mime.). 
Buchanan's  paper  assumes  that  exclusion  is  possible,  but  that  a  (severely  limited) 
degree of  jointness  in  supply  exists,  and  shows  that  on these  assumptions  the  optimal 
number  of  users  of  a  given  public  good  is  normally  finite,  will  vary  from  case  to 
case,  and  may  sometimes  be  quite  small.  Buchanan's  approach  and  my  own  are 
related  in  that  both  of  us  ask  how  the  interests  of  a  member  of  a  group  enjoying 
a  collective  good  will  be  affected  by  increases  or  decreases  in  the  number  of  people 
who consume  the good.  Both  of  us  have  been  working on  this  problem  independent(cid:173)
ly,  and  until  very  recently  in  ignorance  of  each  other's  interest  in  this  particular 
question.  Buchanan  generously  suggests  that  I  may  have  asked  this  question  earlier 
than  he did,  but whereas I  have  barely  touched  upon  the question  merely  to  facilitate 
other  parts  of  my  general  argument,  he  has  developed  an  interesting  and  general 
model which  shows  the relevance  of  this question to a  wide  range  of  policy  problems. 

A  Theory  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

39 

Whether  a  group  behaves  exclusively  or  inclusively,  therefore, 
depends upon the nature of the objective the group seeks, not on any 
characteristics of the membership. Indeed, the same collection of firms 
or individuals  might  be  an  exclusive  group  in  one  context  and  an 
inclusive group  in  another.  The firms  in  an  industry  would  be  an 
exclusive group when they sought a higher price in their industry by 
restricting  output,  but  they  would  be  an  inclusive  group,  and 
would enlist all  the support they could get, when they  sought lower 
taxes,  or  a  tariff,  or  any  other  change  in  government  policy.  The 
point that the  exclusiveness  or  inclusiveness  of  a  group  depends  on 
the objective  at  issue,  rather than  on  any  traits  of  the  membership, 
is  important,  since  many  organizations  operate  both  in  the  market 
to  raise  prices  by  restricting  output,  and  also  in  the  political  and 
social systems to further other common interests. It might be interest(cid:173)
ing,  if  space  permitted,  to  study  such  groups  with  the  aid  of  the 
distinction  between  exclusive  and  inclusive  collective  goods.  The 
logic of this distinction suggests that such groups would have ambiva(cid:173)
lent  attitudes  toward  new  entrants.  And  in  fact  they  do.  Labor 
unions, for example, sometimes advocate the "solidarity of the work(cid:173)
ing  class"  and  demand  the  closed  shop,  yet  set  up  apprenticeship 
rules  that  limit  new  "working  class"  entrants  into  particular  labor 
markets. Indeed, this ambivalence is a fundamental factor with which 
any adequate analysis of what unions seek to  maximize must deal.lI11 
A  further  difference  between  inclusive  and  exclusive  groups  is 
evident  when  formally  organized,  or  even  informally  coordinated, 

59.  There is  some uncertainty about  what unions  maximize.  It is  sometimes thought 
that  unions  do  not  maximize  wage  rates,  since  higher  wages  reduce  the  quantity  of 
labor  demanded  by  the  employer  and  thereby  also  union  membership.  This  reduc(cid:173)
tion  in  membership  is  in  turn  contrary  to  the  institutional  interests  of  the  union  and 
harmful  to  the  power  and  prestige  of  the  union  leaders.  Yet  some  unions,  such  as 
the  United  Mine  Workers,  have  in  fact  raised  wages  to  a  point  they  conceded  would 
reduce  employment  in  their  industry.  One  possible  explanation  is  that  unions  seek 
inclusive  collective  goods  from  government,  as  well  as  higher  wages  in  the  market. 
In  this  nonmarket  capacity  each  union  has  an  interest  in  acquiring  neW  members, 
outsid~ its  "own"  industry  or  craft  as  wdl  as  inside  it.  Higher  wages  do  not  hinder 
the  expansion  of  a  union  in  other  industries  or  skill  categories.  Indeed,  the  higher 
the  wages  a  union  wins  in  any  given  labor  market  the  greater  the  prestige  of  its 
leaders  and  the  greater  its  appeal  to  workers  in  other  labor  markets,  thus  facilitating 
the  growth  of  union  membership  outside  its  original  clientele.  This  is  something  a 
union  may  be  happy  to  do  because  this  will  hdp  it  fulfill  its  political,  lobbying 
function.  Interestingly,  the  CIO,  and  the  catch-all  District  50  of  the  UMW,  may 
possibly  have  allowed  the  influence  of  John  L.  Lewis  and  the  UMW  to  expand  at 
some  times  when  union  wage  levels  limited  employment  in  coal  mining.  I  am  thank(cid:173)
ful  to  one of my  former  students,  John  Beard,  for  stimulating  ideas  on  this  point. 

40 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

behavior is attempted. When there is organized or coordinated effort 
in  an  inclusive  group,  as  many  as  can  be  persuaded  to  help  will  be 
included  in  that  effort.60  Yet  it  will  not  (except  in  marginal  cases, 
where the collective good is only just worth its cost)  be essential that 
every  individual  in  the  group  participate  in  the  organization  or 
agreement.  In  essence  this  is  because  the  non participant  normally 
does  not take the  benefits of an inclusive good away  from  those who 
do  cooperate.  An inclusive  collective  good  is  by  definition  such  that 
the benefit a non cooperator receives  is  not matched by  corresponding 
losses  to  those  who  do  cooperate.61 

When  a  group  seeks  an  exclusive  collective  good  through  an 
agreement or organization of the firms in the market-that is, if there 
is explicit or even tacit collusion in the market-the situation is much 
different. In such a case, though the hope is  that the number of firms 
in  the industry  will be  as small as  possible,  it is  paradoxically  almost 
always essential that there be 100 per cent participation of those  who 
60.  Riker's  interesting  argument,  in  The  Th~ory 0/  Political  Coalitions,  that  there 
will  be  a  tendency  toward  minimum  winning  coalitions  in  many  political  contexts, 
does  not  in  any  way  weaken  the  conclusion  here  that  inclusive  groups  try  to  increase 
their  membership.  Nor  does  it  weaken  any  of  the  conclusions  in  this  book,  for 
Riker's  argument  is  relevant  only  to  zero-sum  situations,  and  no  such  situations  are 
analyzed  in  this  book.  Any  group  seeking  an  inclusive  collective  good  would  not  be 
in  a  zero-sum  situation,  since  the  benefit  by  definition  increases  in  amount  as  more 
join  the  group,  and  as  more  of  the  collective  good  is  provided.  Even  groups  seeking 
exclusive  collective  goods  do  not  fit  Riker's  model,  for  though  the  amount  that  can 
be  sold  at  any  given  price  is  fixed,  the  amount  the  price  will  be  raised  and  thus 
the  gain  to  the  group  are  variable.  It  is  unfortunate  that  Riker's  otherwise  stimulating 
and  useful  book  considers  some  phenomena,  like  military  alliances,  for  which  his 
zero-sum  assumption  is  most  inappropriate.  See  William  H.  Riker,  The  Theory  0/ 
Political  Coalitions  (New  Haven,  Conn.:  Yale  University  Press,  1962). 

61.  If  the  collective  good  were  a  "pure  public  good"  in  Samuel son's  sense,  the 
benefit  the  noncooperator  receives  would  not  only  not  lead  to  a  corresponding  loss 
to  those  who  did  cooperate;  it  would  not  lead  to  any  loss  whatever  for  them.  The 
pure-public·good  assumption  seems,  however,  to  be  unnecessarily  stringent  for  pres(cid:173)
cnt  purposes.  It  would  surely  often  be  true  that  after  some  point,  additional  con(cid:173)
sumers  of  a  collective  good  would,  however  slightly,  reduce  the  amount  available 
to  others.  The argument  in  the  text  therefore  does  not  require  that  inclusive  collective 
goods  be  pure  public  goods.  When  an  inclusive  collective  good  is  not  a  pure  public 
good,  however,  those  in  the  group  enjoying  the  good  would  not  welcome  additional 
members  who  failed  to  pay  adequate  dues.  Dues  would  not  be  adequate  unless  they 
were  at  least  equal  in  value  to  the  reduction  in  the consumption  of  the  old  members 
entailed  by  the  consumption  of  the  new  entrant.  As  long  as  any  significant  degree 
of  "jointness  in  supply"  remains,  however,  the  gains  to  new  entrants  will  exceed 
the  dues  payment  needed  to  ensure  that  the  old  members  will  be  adequately  com(cid:173)
pensated  for  any  curtailment  in  their  own  consumption,  so  the  group  will  remain 
truly  "inclusive." 

A  Theory  of Groups  and  Organizations 

41 
remain in the group.  In essence  this  is  because  even  one  nonpartici(cid:173)
pant can  usually take all the benefits brought about by  the action  of 
the collusive firms for  himself. Unless the costs  of the nonparticipat(cid:173)
ing firm rise too rapidly with increases in output,62 it can continually 
expand  its  output  to  take  advantage  of  the  higher  price  brought 
about by the collusive action until the collusive firms, if they foolishly 
continue to  maintain the higher price,  have  reduced  their output  to 
zero,  all  for  the  benefit  of  the  nonparticipating  firm.  The  non(cid:173)
participating firm  can  deprive  the collusive  firms  of  all  the  benefits 
of their collusion  because  the benefit of any  given  supracompetitive 
price  is  fixed  in  amount;  so  whatever  he  takes  the  collusive  firms 
lose.  There is  then an all-or-none  quality  about exclusive  groups, in 
that  there must often  be  either  100  per cent  participation  or  else  no 
collusion  at  all.  This  need  for  100  per  cent  participation  has  the 
same  effects  in  an  industry  that  a  constitutional  provision  that  all 
decisions  must  be  unanimous  has  in  a  voting  system.  Whenever 
unanimous participation is  required, any  single holdout  has  extraor(cid:173)
dinary  bargaining  power;  he  may  be  able  to  demand  for  himself 
most of the gain that would come from any group-oriented  action.6s 
Moreover,  anyone  in  the  group  can  attempt  to  be  a  holdout,  and 
demand a greater share of the gain in return for  his  (indispensable) 
support. This incentive to holdouts makes any group-oriented action 
less likely than it would otherwise be.  It also implies that each mem(cid:173)
ber  has  a  great  incentive  to  bargain;  he  may  gain  all  by  a  good 
bargain, or lose all in a bad one. This means  much more bargaining 
is likely in any situation where 100 per cent participation is  required 
than  when  some  smaller  percentage  can  undertake  group-oriented 
activity. 

It follows that the relationship among individuals in inclusive and 

62.  If marginal  costs  rise  very  steeply,  and  accordingly  no  firm  has  an  incentive 
to  increase  output  greatly  in  response  to  the  higher  price,  a  single  holdout  need  not 
be  fatal  to  a  collusive  agreement.  But  a  holdout  will  still  be  costly,  for  he  will  tend 
to  gain  more  from  the  collusion  than  a  firm  that  colludes,  and  whatever  he  gains 
the  collusive  firms  lose. 

63.  On  the  implications  of  a  unanimity  requirement,  see  the  important  book  by 

James  M.  Buchanan  and  Gordon  Tullock,  Th~ Calculus  of  Consent:  Logical  Founda(cid:173)
tions  of  Constitutional  Democracy  (Ann  Arbor:  University  of  Michigan  Press,  1962), 
especially  chap.  viii,  pp.  96-116.  I  believe  that  some  complications  in  their  useful 
and provocative  study  could  be  cleared  up  with  the  aid  of some  of  the  ideas  developed 
in  the  present  study;  see  for  example  my  review  of  their  book  in  the  American  Eco· 
nomic  Revi~w. LII  (December  1962),  1217-1218. 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

42 
exclusive  groups  usually  is  quite  different,  whenever  groups  are  so 
small  one  member's  action  has  a  perceptible  effect  on  any  other 
member,  so  that  individual  relationships  matter.  The  firms  in  the 
exclusive  group  want  as  few  others  in  the  group  as  possible,  and 
therefore  each  firm  warily  watches  other  firms  for  fear  they  will 
attempt  to  drive  it  out  of  the  industry.  Each  firm  must,  before  it 
takes  any  action, consider  whether  it  will  provoke a  "price  war"  or 
"cut-throat competition."  This means  that each firm  in an  exclusive 
group must be sensitive to  the other firms  in the group, and consider 
the  reactions  they  may  have  to  any  action  of  its  own.  At  the  same 
time, any group-oriented  behavior in an exclusive group  will  usually 
require 100 per cent participation,  so  each  firm  in an  industry is  not 
only a rival of every other firm, but also an indispensable collaborator 
in any collusive  action.  Therefore, whenever  any  collusion,  however 
tacit, is in question, each  firm  in  the  industry may  consider bargain(cid:173)
ing or holding out for  a larger share of the gains. The firm  that can 
best  guess  what  reaction  other  firms  will  have  to  each  move  of  its 
own will have a considerable advantage in this bargaining. This fact, 
together  with  the  desire  of  the  firms  in  an  industry  to  keep  the 
number in that industry as small as  possible, makes each of  the firms 
in any industry with a small number of firms  very anxious about the 
reactions other firms  will have to any  action it takes. In other words, 
both the desire to  limit the size of the group, and the  usual need for 
100  per  cent  participation  in  any  kind  of  collusion,  increase  the 
intensity  and  complexity  of  oligopolistic  reactions.  The  conclusion 
that industries with small numbers of firms  will be characterized by 
oligopolistic  interaction  with  mutual  dependence  recognized  is  of 
course  familiar  to  every  economist. 

It is  not  however  generally  understood  that  in  inclusive  groups, 

even  small  ones,  on  the  other  hand,  bargaining  or  strategic  inter(cid:173)
action is evidently much  less common and important. This is  partly 
because  there  is  no  desire  to  eliminate  anyone  from  the  inclusive 
group. It is  also  partly because  nothing like  unanimous participation 
is  normally  required,  so  that  individuals  in  the  inclusive  group  are 
not so likely to try to  be holdouts in order to get a larger share of the 
gain.  This  tends  to  reduce  the  amount  of  bargaining  (and  also 
makes  group-oriented  action  more  likely).  Though  the  problem  is 
extremely complex, and some of the tools needed to determine exactly 
how much bargaining there  will be in a given  situation do  not now 
exist, it nonetheless seems very  likely that there is  much less strategic 

A  Theory  of Groups  and  Organizations 

43 

interaction in inclusive groups, and that the hypothesis of independ(cid:173)
ent  behavior  will  frequently  describe  members  of  these  groups 
reasonably  well. 

F.  A  TAXONOMY  OF  GROUPS 

To be  sure,  there can also  be  many instances in  inclusive  or  non(cid:173)
market groups  in  which  individual  members  do  take  into  account 
the  reactions  of  other  members  to  their  actions  when  they  decide 
what action to take-that is, instances in which there is  the strategic 
interaction  among  members  characteristic  of  oligopolistic  industries 
in  which  mutual  dependence  is  recognized.  In  groups  of  one  size 
range  at  least,  such  strategic  interaction  must  be  relatively  impor(cid:173)
tant. That is the size  range where the group is  not so  small that one 
individual would find it profitable to  purchase some of the collective 
good  himself,  but  where  the  number  in  the  group  is  nonetheless 
sufficiently  small that each  member's attempts or lack  of attempts to 
obtain  the  collective  good  would  bring about  noticeable  differences 
in  the  welfare of  some,  or  all,  of  the  others  in the  group.  This  can 
best  be  understood  by  assuming  for  a  moment  that  an  inclusive 
collective  good  is  already  being  provided  in  such  a  group  through 
a formal  organization,  and  then  asking  what  would  happen  if one 
member  of  the  group were  to  cease  paying his  share  of  the  cost  of 
the good. If, in  a reasonably  small  organization,  a  particular  person 
stops  paying  for  the  collective  good  he  enjoys,  the  costs  will  rise 
noticeably for each of the others in the group; accordingly, they  may 
then refuse to continue making their contributions, and the collective 
good  may  no  longer  be  provided.  However,  the  first  person  could 
realize  that  this  might  be  the  result  of  his  refusal  to  pay  anything 
for  the  collective  good,  and  that  he  would  be  worse  off  when  the 
collective  good  is  not  provided  than  when  it  was  provided  and  he 
met part of the  cost.  Accordingly  he  might  continue  making a  con(cid:173)
tribution  toward  the  purchase  of  the  collective  good.  He might;  or 
he  might  not.  As  in  oligopoly  in  a  market  situation,  the  result  is 
indeterminate. The rational member of such a group faces  a strategic 
problem and while the Theory of Games and other types of analyses 
might  prove  very  helpful,  there  seems  to  be  no  way  at  present  of 
getting  a  general,  valid,  and  determinate  solution  at  the  level  of 
abstraction  of  this  chapter.s* 
64.  It is  of  incidental  interest  here  to  note  also  that  oligopoly  in  the  marketplace  is 
in  some  respects  akin  to  logrolling  in  the  organization.  If the  "majority"  that  .,ari· 

44 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

What is  the range  of this indeterminateness?  In a small  group  in 
which a member gets such a large fraction of the total benefit that he 
would be  better off if he  paid  the entire cost himself,  rather  than go 
without the good, there is  some  presumption that the collective good 
will  be  provided.  In  a  group  in  which  no  one  member  got  such  a 
large  benefit  from  the  collective  good  that  he  had  an  interest  in 
providing it  even  if  he  had  to  pay  all of  the  cost,  but  in  which  the 
individual was still so important in terms of the whole group that his 
contribution  or  lack  of  contribution  to  the  group  objective  had  a 
noticeable  effect  on  the costs  or  benefits  of  others  in  the  group,  the 
result  is  indeterminate.65  By  contrast, in  a  large  group  in  which  no 
single individual's contribution makes a perceptible difference  to  the 
group as  a whole,  or  the  burden or benefit of any  single  member  of 
the  group,  it  is  certain  that  a  collective  good  will  not  be  provided 
unless  there  is  coercion  or some  outside  inducements  that  will  lead 
the members of the large group to  act in their common interest.66 

ous  interests  in  a  legislature  need  is  viewed  as  a  collective  good-something  that 
a  particular  interest  cannot  obtain  unless  other  interests  also  share  it-then  the 
parallel  is  quite  close.  The  cost  each  special-interest  legislator  would  like  to  avoid 
is  the  passage  of  the  legislation  desired  by  the  other  special-interest  legislators,  for 
if  these  interests  gain  from  their  legislation,  often  others,  including  his  own  con(cid:173)
stituents,  may  lose.  But  unless  he  is  willing  to  vote  for  the  legislation  desired  by  the 
others,  the  particular  sp"ial-interest  legislator  in  question  will  not  be  able  to  get  his 
own  legislation  passed.  So  his  goal  would  be  to  work  out  a  coalition  with  other 
special-interest  legislators  in  which  they  would  vote  for  exactly  the  legislation  he 
wanted,  and  he  in  turn  would  give  them  as  little  in  return  as  possible,  by  insisting 
that  they  moderate  their  legislative  demands.  But  since  every  potential  logroller  has 
this  same  strategy,  the  result  is  indeterminate:  the  logs  may  be  rolled  or  they  may 
not.  Everyone  of  the  interests  will  be  better  off  if  the  logrolling  is  done  than  if  it 
is  not,  but  as  individual  interests  strive  for  better  legislative  bargains  the  result  of 
the  competing  strategies  may  be  that  no  agreement  is  reached.  This  is  quite  similar 
to  the  situation  oligopolistic  groups  are  in,  as  they  all  desire  a  higher  price  and  will 
all  gain  if  they  restrict  output to  get  it,  but  they  may  not  be  able  to  agree  on  market 
shares. 

65.  The  result  is  clearly  indeterminate  when  F,  is  less  than  elv, at  every  point 
and  it  is  also  true  that  the  group  is  not  so  large  that  no  one  member's  actions 
have  a  noticeable  effect. 

66.  One  friendly  critic  has  suggested  that  even  a  large  pre-existing  organization 
could  continue  providing  a  collective  good  simply  by  conducting  a  kind  of  plebiscite 
among  its  members,  with  the  understanding  that  if  there  were  not  a  unanimous  or 
nearly  unanimous  pledge  to  contribute  toward  providing  the  collective  good,  this 
good  would  no  longer  be  provided.  This  argument,  if  I  understand  it  correctly,  is 
mistaken.  In  such  a  situation,  an  individual  would  know  that  if  others  provided  the 
collective  good  he  would  get  the  benefits  whether  he  made  any  contribution  or  not. 
He  would  therefore  have  no  incentive  to  make  a  pledge  unless  a  completely  unani(cid:173)
mous  set  of  pledges  was  required,  or  for  some  other  reason  his  one  pledge  would 
decide  whether  or  not  the  good  would  be  provided.  But  if  a  pledge  were  required 

A  The-cry  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

45 
The last distinction, between the group so large it definitely cannot 
provide  itself  with  a  collective  good,  and  the  oligopoly-sized  group 
which  may  provide  itself  with  a  collective  good,  is  particularly 
important.  It depends  upon  whether  any  two  or  more  members  of 
the  group  have  a  perceptible  interdependence,  that  is,  on  whether 
the contribution or lack of contribution of  anyone individual  in  the 
group  will have  a perceptible effect  on  the burden or benefit  of  any 
other individual or  individuals  in the  group.  Whether  a group  will 
have  the  possibility  of  providing  itself  with  a  collective  good  with(cid:173)
out coercion or outside  inducements therefore  depends  to  a  striking 
degree upon the number of individuals in the group, since the larger 
the  group,  the  less  the  likelihood  that  the  contribution  of  anyone 
will  be  perceptible.  It is  not,  however,  strictly  accurate to  say  that it 
depends  solely  on  the  number  of  individuals  in  the  group.  The 
relation  between  the  size  of  the  group  and  the  significance  of  an 
individual  member  cannot  be  defined  quite  that  simply.  A  group 
which  has  members  with  highly  unequal  degrees  of  interest  in  a 
collective good,  and  which  wants  a  collective  good  that is  (at  some 
level  of provision)  extremely  valuable  in  relation  to  its  cost,  will  be 
more  apt to  provide  itself  with  a  collective  good  than  other  groups 
with  the  same  number of members.  The  same  situation  prevails  in 
the  study  of  market  structure,  where  again  the  number  of  firms 
an  industry  can  have  and  still  remain  oligopolistic  (and  have  the 
possibility  of supracompetitive  returns)  varies  somewhat  from  case 
to  case.  The  standard  for  determining  whether  a  group  will  have 
the  capacity  to  act,  without  coercion  or  outside  inducements,  in  its 
group  interest  is  (as  it  should  be)  the  same  for  market  and  non(cid:173)
market groups:  it depends  on whether the  individual  actions  of  any 
one  or more  members  in  a  group  are  noticeable  to  any  other  indi(cid:173)
viduals in the  group.S7  This is  most obviously,  but  not exclusively,  a 
function  of  the  number  in  the  group. 

of  every  single  member,  or  if  for  any  other  reason  anyone  member  could  decide 
whether  or  not  the  group  would  get  a  collective  good,  this  one  member  could 
deprive  all  of  the  others  in  the  group  of  great  gains.  He  would  therefore  be  in  a 
position  to  bargain  for  bribes.  But  since  any  other  members  of  the  group  might  gain 
just  as  much  from  the  same  holdout  strategy,  there  is  no  likelihood  that  the  collective 
good  would  be  provided.  See  again  Buchanan  and  Tullock,  pp.  96-116. 

67.  The  noticeability  of  the  actions  of  a  single  member  of  a  group  may  be  influ(cid:173)

enced  by  the  arrangements  the  group  itself  sets  up.  A  previously  organized  group, 
for  example,  might  ensure  that  the  contributions  or  lack  of  contributions  of  any 
member  of  the  group,  and  the  effect  of  each  such  member's  course  on  the  burden 
and  benefit  for  others,  would  be  advertised,  thus  ensuring  that  the  group  effort 

46 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

It is  now possible  to  specify  when  either informal coordination  or 
formal  organization  will  be  necessary  to  obtain  a  collective  good. 
The  smallest  type  of  group-the  group  in  which  one  or  more 
members get such a large fraction of the total benefit that they find it 
worthwhile  to  see  that the  collective  good  is  provided,  even  if  they 
have to pay the entire cost-may get along without any group agree(cid:173)
ment or organization. A group agreement might be  set  up  to  spread 
the  costs  more  widely  or  to  step  up  the  level  of  provision  of  the 
collective  good.  But  since  there  is  an  incentive  for  unilateral  and 
individual  action  to  obtain  the  collective  good,  neither  a  formal 
organization nor even an informal group agreement is indispensable 
to  obtain  a  collective  good.  In  any  group  larger  than  this,  on  the 
other hand, no collective  good can  be  obtained  without some group 
agreement,  coordination,  or  organization.  In  the  intermediate  or 
oligopoly-sized  group,  where  two  or  more  members  must  act 
simultaneously  before  a collective  good can  be  obtained,  there  must 
be  at least tacit coordination or organization. Moreover,  the larger a 
group  is,  the  more  agreement  and  organization  it  will  need.  The 
larger the group, the greater the number that will usually  have to be 
included  in  the  group  agreement  or  organization.  It  may  not  be 
necessary that the entire group be organized, since some subset of the 
whole  group  may  be  able  to  provide  the  collective  good.  But  to 
establish a group  agreement or organization  will  nonetheless  always 
tend  to  be  more  difficult  the  larger  the  size  of  the  group,  for  the 
larger the group  the  more  difficult  it  will  be  to  locate  and  organize 
even  a  subset  of  the  group,  and  those  in  the  subset  will  have  an 
incentive to  continue  bargaining  with  the  others  in  the  group  until 
the  burden  is  widely  shared,  thereby  adding  to  the  expense  of 
bargaining. In short, costs of organization are an increasing function 
of  the  number  of  individuals  in  the  group.  (Though  the  more 
would  not  collapse  from  imperfect  knowledge.  r  therefore  define  "noticeability"  in 
terms  of  the  degree  of  knowledge,  and  the  institutional  arrangements,  that  actually 
exist  in  any  given  group,  insetad  of  assuming  a  "natural  noticeability"  unaffected  by 
any  group  advertising  or  other  arrangements.  This  point,  along  with  many  other 
valuable  comments,  has  been  brought  to  my  attention  by  Professor  Jerome  Rothen(cid:173)
berg,  who  does,  however,  make  much  more  of  a  group's  assumed  capacity  to  create 
"anificial  noticeability"  than  I  would  want  to  do.  I  know  of  no  practical  example 
of  a  group  or  organization  that  has  done  much  of  anything,  apart  from  improve 
information,  to  enhance  the  noticeability  of  an  individual's  actions  in  striving  for 
a  collective  good. 

A  Theory  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

47 
members in  the group the greater the  total costs  of organization, the 
costs  of  organization  per  person  need  not  rise,  for  there  are  surely 
economies  of  scale  in  organization.)  In  certain  cases  a  group  will 
already  be  organized  for  some  other  purpose,  and  then  these  costs 
of  organization  are  already  being  met.  In  such  a  case  a  group's 
capacity  to  provide itself with  a collective good  will  be  explained  in 
part  by  whatever  it  was  that  originally  enabled  it  to  organize  and 
maintain  itself.  This  brings  attention  back  again  to  the  costs  of 
organization  and  shows  that  these  costs  cannot  be  left  out  of  the 
model,  except  for  the  smallest  type  of  group  in  which  unilateral 
action can provide a collective good. The costs  of organization must 
be  clearly  distinguished  from  the  type  of  cost  that  has  previously 
been  considered.  The  cost  functions  considered  before  involved 
only the direct resource costs of obtaining various levels  of provision 
of  a  collective  good.  When there  is  no  pre-existing  organization  of 
a  group,  and  when  the  direct  resource  costs  of  a  collective  good  it 
wants  are  more  than  any  single  individual  could  profitably  bear, 
additional costs  must be incurred to  obtain an agreement about how 
the burden will be  shared and to coordinate or organize the effort to 
obtain  the  collective  good.  These  are  the  costs  of  communication 
among group members, the costs of any bargaining among them, and 
the  costs  of  creating,  staffing,  and  maintaining  any  formal  group 
organization. 

A  group  cannot  get  infinitesimally  small  quantities  of  a  formal 
organization, or even of an informal group agreement; a group with 
a  given  number of  members  must  have  a certain  minimal  amount 
of  organization or  agreement  if  it is  to  have  any  at  all.  Thus  there 
are  significant  initial  or  minimal  costs  of  organization  for  each 
group.  Any  group  that  must  organize  to  obtain  a  collective  good, 
then,  will  find  that  it has  a certain minimum organization cost  that 
must  be  met,  however  little  of  the  collective  good  it  obtains.  The 
greater  the  number  in  the  group,  the  greater  these  minimal  costs 
will be. When this minimal organizational cost is  added to the other 
initial  or  minimal  costs  of  a  collective  good,  which  arise  from  its 
previously  mentioned  technical  characteristics,  it  is  evident  that  the 
cost of the first unit of a collective good will  be quite high in  relation 
to  the cost of some  subsequent units.  However immense the  benefits 
of a collective good, the higher the absolute total costs  of getting any 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

48 
amount of that good, the  less  likely it is that even a minimal amount 
of that good could  be  obtained without coercion  or separate, outside 
incentives. 

This  means  that  there  are  now  three  separate  but  cumulative 
factors  that keep  larger groups  from  furthering  their  own  interests. 
First, the larger the group, the smaller the fraction  of the total group 
benefit any  person acting in the group  interest receives,  and  the  less 
adequate  the  reward  for  any  group-oriented  action,  and  the  farther 
the  group  falls  short  of  getting  an  optimal  supply  of  the  collective 
good, even if it should get some. Second, since  the larger the group, 
the smaller the share of  the  total benefit going to any  individual,  or 
to  any  (absolutely)  small  subset  of  members  of  the  group,  the  less 
the  likelihood  that  any  small  subset  of  the  group,  much  less  any 
single individual,  will  gain enough from getting the  collective  good 
to bear the  burden of providing  even  a small amount of it;  in other 
words, the larger the group the smaller the likelihood of oligopolistic 
interaction  that  might  help  obtain  the  good.  Third,  the  larger  the 
number of members  in the group  the greater the  organization costs, 
and  thus  the  higher  the  hurdle  that  must  be  jumped  before  any  of 
the  collective  good  at  all  can  be  obtained.  For  these  reasons,  the 
larger the group the farther it will fall  short of providing an  optimal 
supply of a collective good, and very  large groups  normally  will  not, 
in  the  absence  of  coercion  or  separate,  outside  incentives,  provide 
themselves  with even  minimal amounts of a collective good.68 

68.  There  is  one  logically  conceivable,  but  surdy  empirically  trivial,  case  in  which 
a  large  group  could  be  provided  with  "  very  small  amount  of  a  collective  good 
without  coercion  or  outside  incentives.  If some  very  small  group  enjoyed  a  collective 
good  so  inexpensive  that  anyone of  the  members  would  benefit  by  making  sure  that 
it  was  provided,  even  if  he  had  to  pay  all  of  the  cost,  and  if  millions  of  people  then 
entered  the  group,  with  the  cost  of  the  good  nonetheless  remaining  constant,  the 
large  group  could  be  provided  with  a  little  of  this  collective  good.  This  is  because 
by  hypothesis  in  this  example  the costs  have  remained  unchanged,  so  that  one  perS('fl 
still  has  an  incentive  to  see  that  the  good 
is  provided.  Even  in  such  a  case  as 
this.  however.  it  would  still  not  be  quite  right to  say  that  the  large  group  was  acting 
in  its  group  interest,  since  the  output  of  the  collective  good  would  be  incredibly 
suboptimal.  The  optimal  level  of  provision  of  the  public  good  would  mcrease  each 
time  an  individual  entered  the  group,  since  the  unit  cost  of  the  collective  good  by 
hypothesis  is  constant,  while  the  benefit  from  an  additional  unit  of  it  increases  with 
every  entrant.  Yet  the  original  provider  would  have  no  incentive  to  provide  more 
as  the  group  expanded,  unless  he  furmed  an  organization  to  share  costs  with  the 
others  ID  this  (now  large)  group.  But  lh"t  would  ell tail  incurring  the  considerable 
costs  of  a  large  organization.  and  there  would  be  no  way  these  costs  could  be  covered 
throu~h  the  voluntary  and  rational  action  of  the  individuals  in  the  group.  Thus, 

A  Theory of Groups and Organizations 

49 

Now that  all  sizes  of  groups  have  been  considered,  it  is  possible 
to  develop  the  classification  of  groups  that  is  needed.  In  an  article 
that was  originally  part of this  study,  but which has  been  published 
elsewhere,s9  this  writer and his  co-author argued that the concept of 
the group or industry can be given a precise theoretical meaning, and 
should  be  used,  along  with  the  concept  of  pure  monopoly,  in  the 
study of market structure. In that article the situation in which there 
was  only  one  firm  in  the  industry  was  called  pure  monopoly.  The 
situation  where  the  firms  are  so  few  that  the  aCtions  of  one  firm 
would  have  a  noticeable  effect  on  some  one  other  firm  or  group of 
firms  was  called  oligopoly;  and the situation  where no one firm had 
any  noticeable  effect on any other firm  was  called "atomistic compe(cid:173)
tition."  The  category  of  atomistic  competition  was  subdivided  into 
pure  competition  and  monopolistic  competition  within  the  large 
group,  and oligopoly  was  also  divided  into two subdivisions  accord(cid:173)
ing as  the  product  was  homogeneous or differentiated. 

For inclusive or nonmarket groups  the categories  must be  slightly 
different.  The  analog  to  pure  monopoly  (or  pure  monopsony)  is 
obviously  the single individual outside the market seeking some non(cid:173)
collective  good,  some  good  without  external  economies  or  disecon(cid:173)
omies.  In  the  size  range  that  corresponds  to  oligopoly  in  market 
groups,  there  are  two  separate  types  of  nonmarket  groups:  "privi(cid:173)
leged"  groups  and  "intermediate" groups.  A  "privileged" group  is  a 

if  the  total  benefit  from  a  collective  good  exceeded  its  costs  by  the  thousandfold  or 
millionfold,  it  is  logically  possible  that  a  large  group  could  provide  itself  with  some 
amount  of  that  collective  good,  but  the  level  of  provision  of  the  collective  good  in 
such  a  case  would  be  only  a  minute  fraction  of  the  optimal  level.  It  is  not  easy  to 
think  of  practical  examples  of  groups  that  would  fit  this  description.  but  one  pos(cid:173)
sible  example  is  discussed  on  page  161,  note  94.  It  would  be  easy  to  rule  out 
even  any  such  exceptional  cases,  however,  simply  by  defining  all  groups  that  could 
provide  themselves  with  some  amount  of  a  collective  good  as  "small  groups"  (or  by 
giving  them  other  names),  while  putting  all  groups  that  could  not  provide  them(cid:173)
selves  with  a  collective  good  in  another  class.  But  this  easy  route  must  be  rejected, 
for  that  would  make  this  part of  the  theory  tautologous  and  thus  incapable  of  refuta· 
tion.  Therefore  the  approach  here  has  been  to  make  the  (surely  reasonable)  empirical 
hypothesis  that  the  total  costs  of  the  collective  goods  wanted  by  large  groups  an 
large  enough  to  exceed  the  value  of  the  small  fraction  of  the  total  benefit  that  an 
individual  in  a  large  group  would  get,  so  that  he  will  not  provide  the  good.  There 
may  be  exceptions  to  this,  as  to  any  other  empirical  statement,  and  thus  there  may 
be  instances  in  which  large  groups  could  provide  themselves  with  (at  most  minute 
amounts  of)  collective  goods  through  the  voluntary  and  rational  action  of  one  of 
their members. 

69.  Olson  and  McFarland  (note  14  above). 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

so 
group such  that each  of  its  members, or at  least  some  one  of  them, 
has  an  incentive  to  see  that  the  collective  good  is  provided,  even  if 
he  has  to  bear  the  full  burden  of  providing  it  himself.  In  such  a 
group  there  is  a  presumption 70  that  the  collective  good  will  be 
obtained, and it may be  obtained without any group organization or 
coordination whatever. An "intermediate" group is  a group in which 
no single member gets a share of the benefit sufficient to give him an 
incentive  to  provide  the  good  himself,  but  which  does  not  have  so 
many  members  that  no  one  member  will  notice  whether  any  other 
member  is  or is  not  helping  to  provide  the  collective  good.  In  such 
a  group  a  collective  good  may,  or  equally  well  may  not,  be  ob(cid:173)
tained,  but  no  collective  good  may  ever  be  obtained  without  some 
group coordination  or organization.71  The analog  to  atomistic  com(cid:173)
petition  in  the  nonmarket  situation  is  the  very  large  group,  which 
will here be called the "latent" group. It is  distinguished  by  the fact 
that, if one member does or does not help provide the collective good, 
no  other  one  member  will  be  significantly  affected  and  therefore 
none has any reason to  react. Thus an individual in a "latent" group, 
by  definition,  cannot  make  a  noticeable  contribution  to  any  group 
effort, and since no  one in  the  group  will  react  if he  makes  no  con(cid:173)
tribution,  he  has  no  incentive  to  contribute.  Accordingly,  large  or 
"latent" groups  have  no  incentive  to  act  to  obtain  a  collective  good 
because, however  valuable the collective good  might be  to  the  group 
as  a whole, it does  not offer  the individual  any  incentive to  pay  dues 

70.  It  is  concdvable  that  a  "privileged"  group  might  not  provide  itself  with  a 

collective  good,  since  there  might  be  bargaining  within  the  group  and  this  bargain(cid:173)
ing  might  be  unsuccessful.  Imagine  a  privileged  group  in  which  t!Vl!ry  member  of 
the  group  would  gain  so  much  from  the  collective  good  that  he  would  be  better  off 
if  he  paid  the  full  cost  of  providing  the  collective  good  than  he  would  be  if  the 
good  were  not  provided.  It  is  still  conceivable  that  each  member  of  the  group, 
knowing  that  each  of  the  others  would  also  be  better  off  if  they  provided  the  good 
alone  than  they  would  be  if  no  collective  good  were  obtained,  would  refuse  to 
contribute  anything  toward  obtaining  the  collective  good.  Each  could  refuse 
to 
help  provide  the  collective  good  on  the  mistaken  assumption  that  the  others  would 
provide  it  without  him.  It does  not  seem  very  likely  that  all  of  the  members  of  the 
group  would  go  on  making  this  mistake  permanently,  however. 

71.  "The  character  of  the  numerically  intermediate  structure,  therefore,  can  be 
explained  as  a  mixture  of  both:  so  that  each  of  the  features  of  both  the  small  and 
large  group  appears  in the  intermediate  group,  as  a  fragmentary  trait,  now  emerging, 
now  disappearing  or  becoming  latent.  Thus,  the  intermediate  structures  objectively 
share  the  essential  character  of  the  smaller  and  larger  structures-partially  or  alter(cid:173)
nately.  This  explains  the  subjective  uncertainty  regarding  the  decision  to  which  of 
the  two  they  belong."  (Simmel,  Sociology  of  Georg  Simmd,  pp.  116-117.) 

A  Theory  of  Groups  and  Organizations 

51 

to any organization working in the latent group's interest, or to  bear 
in any  other way  any  of  the  costs  of  the  necessary  collective  action. 
Only  a separate and "selective" incentive  will  stimulate  a  rational 
individual in a latent group to act in  a group-oriented  way.  In such 
circumstances group action  can  be  obtained only  through  an  incen(cid:173)
tive that operates, not indiscriminately, like the collective good, upon 
the group as a whole, but rather selectively toward the individuals in 
the group. The incentive must be "selective" so that those who do not 
join  the  organization  working  for  the  group's  interest,  or  in  other 
ways  contribute  to  the  attainment  of  the  group's  interest,  can  be 
treated  differently  from  those  who  do.  These  "selective  incentives" 
can  be  either  negative  or  positive,  in  that  they  can  either  coerce  by 
punishing those  who fail to bear an allocated share of the costs of the 
group  action,  or  they  can  be  positive  inducements  offered  to  those 
who act  in the group  interest.72  A latent  group  that  has  been led  to 
act in its group interest, either because of coercion of the individuals 
in the group or because of positive rewards  to those individuals, will 
here  be  called  a  "mobilized"  latent  group.7S  Large  groups  are  thus 
called  "latent" groups because  they  have  a  latent  power  or capacity 
for  action,  but  that  potential  power  can  be  realized  or  "mobilized" 
only  with  the  aid  of  "selective  incentives." 

The chances for  group-oriented action are indeed different in each 
of  the  categories  just explained.  In  some  cases  one  may  have  some 
expectation  that  the  collective  or  public  good  will  be  provided;  in 
other cases  one  may  be  assured  that  (unless  there  are  selective  in(cid:173)
centives) it will not; and still other cases could just as easily go either 
72.  Coercion  is  here  defined  to  be  a  punishment  that  leaves  an  individual  on  a 
lower  indifference  curve  than  he  would  have  been  on  had  he  borne  his  allocated 
share  of  the  cost  of  the  collective  good  and  not  been  coerced.  A  positive  inducement 
is  defined  to  be  any  reward  that  leaves  an  individual  who  pays  his  allocated  share 
of  the  cost  of  a  collective  good  and  receives  the  reward,  on  a  higher  indifference 
curve  than  he  would  have  been  had  he  borne  none  of  the  cost  of  the  collective  good 
and  lost  the  reward.  In  other  words,  selective  incentives  are  defined  to  be  greater 
in  value,  in  terms  of  each  individual"s  preferences,  than  each  individual"s  share  of 
the  cost  of  the  collective  good.  Sanctions  and  inducements  of  smaller  value  will  not 
be  sufficient  to  mobilize  a  latent  group.  On  some  of  the  problems  of  distinguishing 
and  defining  coercion  and  positive  incentives  see  Alfred  Kuhn,  The  Study  01  Society: 
A  Unified  Appr(}{Kh  (Homewood,  Ill.:  Richard  D.  Irwin,  Inc.  and  the  Dorsey  Press, 
Inc.,  1963),  pp.  365-370. 

73.  Deutsch  has  also  used  the  term  "mobilization"  in  a  somewhat  similar  context, 
but his  use  of  the  word  is  not  the  same.  See  Karl  Deutsch,  "Social  Mobilization  and 
Political  Development,"  American  Political  Science  Re/liew,  LV  (September  1961), 
493-514. 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

52 
way.  In any event, size is  one of the determining factors  in deciding 
whether or  not  it  is  possible  that  the  voluntary,  rational  pursuit  of 
individual  interest  will  bring  forth  group-oriented  behavior.  Small 
groups will further  their common interests  better than  large  groups. 
The question  asked earlier  in  this  chapter  can  now  be  answered. 
It now seems  that small groups are  not only  quantitatively,  but also 
qualitatively,  different  from  large  groups,  and  that  the  existence  of 
large  associations  cannot  be  explained  in  terms  of  the  same  factors 
that explain the existence  of small groups. 

IT 

Group Size  and  Group Behavior 

A.  THE  COHERENCE  AND  EFFECTIVENESS  OF  SMALL  GROUPS 

The  greater  effectiveness  of  relatively  small  groups-the  "privi(cid:173)

leged" and "intermediate" groups-is evident  from  observation  and 
experience  as  well  as  from  theory.  Consider,  for  example,  meetings 
that  involve  too  many  people,  and  accordingly  cannot  make  deci(cid:173)
sions  promptly  or  carefully.  Everyone  would  like  to  have  the 
meeting end  quickly,  but few  if  any  will  be  willing  to  let  their  pet 
concern  be  dropped  to  make this  possible.  And  though  all  of  those 
participating  presumably  have  an  interest  in  reaching  sound  deci(cid:173)
sions,  this  all  too  often  fails  to  happen.  When  the  number  of 
participants is  large,  the  typical  participant  will  know that his  own 
efforts  will probably not make much difference to  the  outcome,  and 
that he  will  be  affected  by  the  meeting's decision  in  much the  same 
way  no matter how much  or  how little effort  he  puts into  studying 
the  issues.  Accordingly,  the  typical  participant  may  not  take  the 
trouble  to  study  the  issues  as  carefully  as  he  would  have  if  he  had 
been  able  to  make  the  decision  by  himself.  The  decisions  of  the 
meeting  are  thus  public  goods  to  the  participants  (and  perhaps 
others), and the contribution that each participant will make toward 
achieving  or  improving  these  public  goods  will  become  smaller  as 
the meeting becomes larger. It is for these reasons, among others, that 
organizations  so  often  turn  to  the  small  group;  committees,  sub(cid:173)
committees,  and  small  leadership  groups  are  created,  and  once 
created they tend to play  a crucial role. 

This  observation  is  corroborated  by  some  interesting  research 
results.  John  James,  among others,  has done empirical  work on  this 
subject,  with  results  that  support  the  theory  offered  in  this  study, 
though his  work  was  not  done  to  prove  any  such  theory.  Professor 
James  found  that  in  a  variety  of  institutions,  public  and  private, 
national and local,  "action taking"  groups  and  subgroups  tended  to 
he  much smaller than "non-action taking" groups and subgroups. In 

54 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

one  sample  he  studied,  the average  size  of  the  "action  taking"  sub(cid:173)
groups  was 6.5  members, whereas the average size of the "non-action 
taking" subgroups was  14 members. These subgroups were in a large 
banking concern,  whose  secretary  spontaneously  offered  the  follow(cid:173)
ing opinion: "We have found," he wrote, "that committees should be 
small  when  you  expect  action  and  relatively  large  when  you  are 
looking for  points of view,  reactions, etc," 1  This is  apparently  not  a 
situation restricted to banking. It is  widely known that in the United 
States  Congress  and  in  the  state  legislatures,  power  resides  to  a 
remarkable,  and  what  is  to  many  an  alarmmg degree,  in  the  com(cid:173)
mittees  and  subcommittees.2  James  found  that  U.S.  Senate  sub(cid:173)
committees  at the time of  his  investigation had 5.4  members on the 
average, House subcommittees had 7.8, the Oregon state government, 
4.7,  and  the  Eugene,  Oregon,  municipal  government,  5.3.3  In  short, 
the  groups  that  actually  do  the  work  are  quite  small.  A  different 
study corroborates James's findings;  Professor A. Paul Hare, in con(cid:173)
trolled  experiments  with groups  of  five  and twelve boys,  found  that 
the performance  of  the  groups  of five  was  generally  superior.i  The 
sociologist Georg Simmel explicitly  stated that smaller  groups could 
act  more  decisively  and  use  their  resources  more  effectively  than 
large groups:  "Small, centripetally organized groups  usually  call  on 
and use  all their energies, while in large groups, forces  remain much 
oftener  potential." G 

The fact  that the partnership can  be  a workable institutional form 
when the number of partners  is  quite small,  but is  generally  unsuc(cid:173)
cessful  when  the  number  of  partners  is  very  large,  may  provide 

1.  John  James,  "A  Preliminary  Study  of  the  Size  Determinant  in  Small  Group 

Interaction,"  American  Sociological  Revi"w,  XVI  (August  1951),474-477. 

2.  Bertram  M.  Gross,  The  Legislati"e  Struggle  (New  York:  McGraw·Hill,  1953), 
pp.  265-337;  see  also  Ernest  S.  Griffith,  Congress  (New  York:  New  York  University 
Press,  1951). 

3.  For  a  light·hearted  and  humorous,  but  nonetheless  helpful,  argument  that 
the  ideal  committee  or  cabinet  has  only  five  members,  see  C.  Northcote  Parkinson, 
Parkinson's  Law  (Boston:  Houghton  Miffiin,  1957),  pp.  33-34. 

4.  A.  Paul Hare, "A Study  of Interaction and Consensus in Different Sized  Groups," 

American  Sociological  Review,  XVII  {June  1952),261-268. 

5.  Georg  Simmel. The Sociology  ot  G~orge Simmei.  trans.  Kurt  H.  Wnlff  (Glencoe, 
Ill.:  Free  Press  (1950]),  p.  92.  In  another  place  Simmel  says  that  socialist  societies, 
by  which  he  appears  to  mean  voluntary  groups  that  share  their  incomes  according 
to  some  principle  of  equity,  must  necessarily  be  small.  "Up  to  this  day,  at  least, 
socialistic  or  nearly  socialistic  societies  have  been  possible  only  in  very  sma.lI  &rQups 
and  have  always  failed  in  larger  ones"  (p.  S8). 

Group  Size and  Group Behavior 

55 
another  illustration  of  the  advantages  of  smaller  groups.  When  a 
partnership has many members, the individual partner observes that 
his own effort or contribution will not greatly affect the performance 
of the  enterprise, and expects  that  he  will get  his  prearranged  share 
of  the  earnings  whether  or  not  he  contributes  as  much  as  he  could 
have done. The earnings of a partnership, in which each partner gets 
a prearranged  percentage  of  the  return,  are  a  collective  good  to  the 
partners, and  when  the  number  of  partners  increases,  the  incentive 
for  each  partner  to  work  for  the  welfare  of  the  enterprise  lessens. 
This is  to be  sure only one of a  number of  reasons  why  partnerships 
tend to persist only  when  the number of partners is  fairly  small, but 
it is one  that could be  decisive  in a really  large partnership.6 

The autonomy  of  management  in  the  large  modern  corporation, 

with  thousands  of  stockholders,  and  the  subordination  of  manage(cid:173)
ment  in  the  corporation  owned  by  a  small  number of  stockholders, 
may  also  illustrate the special difficulties of the large group. The fact 
that management  tends to  control  the large corporation and  is  able, 
on occasion,  to  further  its  own  interest  at  the  expense  of  the  stock(cid:173)
holders,  is  surprising,  since  the common stockholders have  the  legal 
power  to  discharge  the  management  at  their  pleasure,  and  since 
they have, as  a group, also  an incentive  to do so,  if the management 
is  running  the  corporation  partly  or  wholly  in  the  interest  of  the 
managers. Why, then, do  not the  stockholders  exercise their power? 
They  do  not  because,  in  a  large  corporation,  with  thousands  of 
stockholders,  any  effort  the  typical  stockholder  makes  to  oust  the 
management  will  probably  be  unsuccessful;  and  even  if  the  stock(cid:173)
holder should be successful, most of the returns in the form of higher 
dividends  and  stock  prices  will  go  to  the  rest  of  the  stockholders, 
since  the  typical  stockholder  owns  only  a  trifling  percentage  of  the 
outstanding stock. The income of the corporation is  a collective good 
to  the  stockholders,  and  the  stockholder  who  holds  only  a  minute 
percentage of the total stock, like any member of  a latent group, has 
no  incentive  to  work  in  the  group  interest.  Specifically,  he  has  no 
incentive  to  challenge  the  management  of  the  company,  however 
inept  or  corrupt  it  might  be.  (This  argument  does  not,  however, 
entirely  apply  to  the  stockholder who  wants  the  manager's  position 

6.  Th~ for~going  argument  n~ed  not  apply  to  partners  that  are  suppos~d  to  be 
"sleeping  partners,"  i.e.,  provide  only  capital.  Nor  does  it  tak~  account  of  the  fact 
that  in  many  cases  each  partner  is  liable  for  the  losses  of  the  whole  partnership. 

56 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

and pelf for  himself,  for  he  is  not  working for  a  collective  good;  it 
is  significant that most attempts to overthrow corporate management 
are  started  by  those  who  want  to  take  over  the  management  them(cid:173)
selves.)  Corporations  with  a  small  number of  stockholders,  by  con(cid:173)
trast, are  not only de jure,  but also  de  facto,  controlled by  the  stock(cid:173)
holders,  for  in such  cases  the  concepts  of  privileged  or  intermediate 
groups  apply.1 

There  is  also  historical  evidence  for  the  theory  presented  here. 
George  C.  Homans,  in  one  of  the  best-known  books  in  American 
social science,s has pointed out that the small group has shown much 
more  durability  throughout  history  than  the  large  group: 

At the level of ... the small group, at the  level,  that is,  of a  social  unit 
(no matter  by  what  name  we call  it)  each  of  whose  members  can  have 
some  firsthand  knowledge  of  each  of  the  others,  human  society,  for 
many  millennia longer than  written history,  has  been  able  to cohere  ... 
They  have  tended  to  produce  a  surplus  of  the  goods  that  make  organi(cid:173)
zation  successful. 

.  .  .  ancient  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia  were  civilizations.  So  were 
classical India and China; so was Greco-Roman civilization, and so is  our 
own Western  civilization  that  grew  out of medieval  Christendom  ... 

The appalling  fact  is  that,  after  flourishing  for  a  span  of  time,  every 
civilization but one has collapsed ... formal organizations that articulated 
the  whole  have  fallen  to  pieces  ... much  of  the  technology  has  even 
been  forgotten  for  lack  of  the  large  scale  cooperation  that  could  put  it 
in effect  ... the  civilization  has  slowly  sunk  to  a  Dark  Age,  a  situation, 
much  like  the  one  from  which  it  started  on  its  upward  path,  in  which 
the  mutual  hostility  of  small  groups  is  the  condition  of  the  internal 
cohesion  of  each  one  .  .  .  Society  can  fall  thus  far,  but  apparently  no 
farther  ... One  can  read  the  dismal  story,  eloquently  told,  in  the  his(cid:173)
torians  of  civilization  from  Spengler  to  Toynbee.  The  one  civilization 
that  has  not  entirely  gone to  pieces  is  our  Western  Civilization,  and  we 
are  desperately  anxious  about  it. 

[But]  At  the  level  of  the  tribe  or  group,  society  has  always  found 

itself able  to cohere.9 

7.  See  Adolph  A.  Berle,  Jr.,  and  Gardiner  C.  Means,  Th~ Modern  Corporation  and 
Pri/Jat~  Property  (New  York:  Macmillan,  1932);  J.  A.  Livingston,  Th~  American 
Stockholder,  rev.  ed.  (New  York:  Collier  Books,  1963);  P.  Sargent  Florence,  Owner(cid:173)
ship,  Control  and  Success  of  Large  Companies  (London:  Sweet  &  Maxwell,  1961); 
William  Mennell,  Tak~over  (London:  Lawrence  &  Wish art,  1962). 

8.  George  C.  Homans,  The  Human  Group  (New  York:  Harcourt,  Brace,  1950). 
9.  Ibid.,  pp.  454-456.  See  also  Neil  W.  Chamberlain,  General  Theory  of  Economic 
Process  (New  York:  Harper,  1955),  esp.  pp.  347-348,  and  Sherman  Krupp,  Pattern 
in  Organization  Analysis  (Philadelphia:  Chilton,  1961),  pp.  118-139  and  171-176. 

Group Size and  Group Behavior 

57 
Homans' claim  that  the  smallest  groups  are  the  most  durable  is 
quite persuasive and certainly  supports  the theory  offered  here.  But 
his deduction from these historical facts is  not wholly consistent with 
the  approach in this  study.  His book focuses  on  the  following  idea: 
"Let us put our case for the last time: At the level of the small group, 
society  has  always  been  able  to  cohere.  We infer,  therefore,  that  if 
civilization is  to  stand, it must retain ... some of the features  of the 
small group  itself." 10  Homans'  conclusion  depends  on the  assump(cid:173)
tion  that  the  techniques  or  methods  of  the  small  group  are  more 
effective.  But this  is  not necessarily  true;  the  small,  or "privileged," 
group  is  in  a  more  advantageous  position  from  the  beginning,  for 
some or all  of its  members  will  have  an  incentive to  see  that it does 
not fail. This is  not true of the large group;  the large group does  not 
automatically  find  that the  incentives  that  face  the  group  also  face 
the  individuals  in  the  group.  Therefore,  it  does  not  follow  that, 
because the small group has  historically been more effective, the very 
large group can  prevent failure  by  copying its  methods. The "privi(cid:173)
leged"  group,  and  for  that  matter  the  "intermediate"  group,  are 
simply  in  a  more  advantageous  position.H 

B.  PROBLEMS  OF  THE  TRADITIONAL  THEORIES 

Homans'  belief  that  the  lessons  of  the  small  group  should  be 
applied to  large  groups  has  much  in  common  with  the  assumption 
upon  which much  small-group  research  is  based.  There  has  been  a 
vast amount of research into the small group in recent years, much of 
it based  on  the  idea  that the  results  of  (experimentally  convenient) 
research  on  small  groups  can  be  made  directly  applicable  to  larger 
groups merely  by  multiplying these  results by  a scale  factor. 12  Some 
social  psychologists,  sociologists,  and  political  scientists  assume  that 
the small group is so much like the large group, in matters other than 
size, that it must behave  according to somewhat similar laws.  But if 
the distinctions drawn here among the "privileged" group, the "inter-

10.  Homans,  p.  468. 
11.  The  diffuence  between  latent  groups  and  privileged  or  intermediate  groups  is 
only  one  of  several  factors  accounting  for  the  instability  of  many  ancient  empires 
and  civilizations.  I  have  pointed  to  another  such  factor  myself  in a  forthcoming  book. 
12.  Kurt  Lewin,  Field  Theory  in  Social  Change  (New  York:  Harper,  1951),  pp. 
163-164;  Harold  H.  Kelley  and  John  W.  Thibaut,  The  Social  Psychology  ot Groups 
(New  York:  John  Wiley.  1959),  pp.  6,  191-192;  Hare,  "Study  of  Interaction  and 
Consensus," pp.  261-268;  Sidney  Verba,  Small Groups and Political  Behavior  (Prince(cid:173)
toD,  N.J.:  Princeton  University  Press,  1961),  pp.  4,  14,  99-109,  245-248. 

58 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

mediate"  group,  and  the  "latent"  group  have  any  meaning,  this 
assumption  is  unwarranted,  at  least  so  long  as  the  groups  have  a 
common,  collective  interest.  For  the  small,  privileged  group  can 
expect  that  its  collective  needs  will  probably  be  met  one  way  or 
another,  and  the  fairly  small  (or  intermediate)  group  has  a  fair 
chance  that  voluntary  action  will  solve  its  collective  problems,  but 
the  large,  latent  group  cannot  act  in  accordance  with  its  common 
interests so long as the members of the group are free to further their 
individual  interests. 

The  distinctions  developed  in  this  study  also  suggest  that  the 

traditional  explanation  of  voluntary associations  explained  in  Chap(cid:173)
ter  I  needs  amendment.  The  traditional  theory  emphasizes  the 
(alleged)  universality  of  participation  in  voluntary  associations  in 
modern  societies  and  explains  small  groups  and  large  organizations 
in  terms  of  the  same  causes.  In  its  most  sophisticated  form,  the 
traditional  theory  argues  that  the  prevalence  of  participation  in  the 
modern voluntary association is due to the "structural differentiation" 
of developing societies;  that is,  to  the fact  that as  the small,  primary 
groups of primitive society have declined or become more specialized, 
the functions  that multitudes  of these  small groups  used  to  perform 
are  being  taken  over  by  large  voluntary  associations.  But,  if  the 
meaningless  notion of a  universal  "joiner  instinct"  is  to  be  rejected, 
how  is  the  membership  in  these  new,  large  voluntary  associations 
recruited?  There  are  admittedly  functions  for  large  associations  to 
perform,  as  small,  primary  groups  become  more  specialized  and 
decline.  And  the  performance  of  these  functions  no  doubt  would 
bring  benefits  to  large  numbers  of  people.  But  will  these  benefits 
provide an incentive for any of the individuals affected to  join, much 
less  create,  a  large  voluntary  association  to  perform  the  function  in 
question?  The answer is  that, however beneficial the  functions  large 
voluntary  associations  are  expected  to  perform, there  is  no  incentive 
for  any  individual  in  a  latent  group  to  join  such  an  association.la 
However important a function  may  be,  there is  no presumption that 
a  latent  group  will  be  able  to  organize  and  act  to  perform  this 
function.  Small  primary  groups  by  contrast  presumably  can  act  to 
perform functions that are  beneficial to them. The traditional theory 

13.  There  is  no  suggestion  here.  of  cours~. that  all  groups  are  necessarily  explained 
in  terms  of  monetary  or  material  interests.  The  argument  does  not  require  that 
individuals  have  only  monetary  or  material  wants.  See  note  17  below. 

Group Size and  Group Behatl;cw 

59 

of  voluntary  associations  is  therefore  mistaken  to  the  extent  that  it 
implicitly  assumes  that  latent  groups  will  act  to  perform functional 
purposes  the  same  way  small  groups  will.  The  existence  of  such 
large  organizations  as  do  exist  must  moreover  be  explained  by 
different  factors  from  those  that  explain  the  existence  of  smaller 
groups. This suggests  that  the  traditional  theory  is  incomplete,  and 
needs to be modified in the light of the logical relationships explained 
in  this  study.  This  contention  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  the 
traditional  theory  of voluntary  associations  is  not at all  in  harmony 
with  the  empirical  evidence,  which  indicates  that  participation  in 
large  voluntary  organizations  is  very  much  less  than  that  theory 
would  suggest.u 

There is  still another respect  in which  the  analysis  developed  here 
can  be  used  to  modify  the  traditional  analysis.  This  involves  the 
question  of  group  consensus.  It is  often  assumed  (though  usually 
implicitly)  in  discussions  of  organizational  or  group  cohesion  that 
the  crucial  matter  is  the  degree  of  consensus;  if  there  are  many 
serious  disagreements,  there will be  no coordinated, voluntary  effort, 
but if there  is  a  high  degree  of  agreement  on  what  is  wanted  and 
how  to  get  it there will  almost certainly  be  effective  group  action.15 
The degree  of  consensus  is  sometimes  discussed  as  though  it  were 
the  only important determinant of  group  action  or  group  cohesion. 
There  is,  of  course,  no  question  that  a  lack  of consensus  is  inimical 
to  the  prospects  for  group  action  and  group  cohesion.  But  it  does 
not  follow  that  perfect  consensus,  both  about  the  desire  for  the 
collective  good  and  the  most  efficient  means  of  getting  it,  will 
always  bring  about  the  achievement  of  the  group  goal.  In  a  large, 

14.  Mirra  Komaravsky,  'The Voluntary  Associations  of Urban  Dwellers,"  American 
Sociological  Review,  XI  (December  1946),  686---698;  Floyd  Dotson,  "Patterns  of 
Voluntary  Membership  among  Working  Class  Families,"  American  Sociological  Re(cid:173)
view,  XVI  (October  1951),  687;  John  C.  Scott,  Jr.,  "Membership  and  Participation 
in  Voluntary  Associations,"  American  Sociological  Review,  XXII  (June  1957),  315; 
and  Murray  Hausknecht,  The  /oiners-A  Sociological  Description  of  Voluntary  Asso(cid:173)
ciation  Membership  in  the  United  States  (New  York:  Bedminster  Press,  1962). 

IS.  See  Hare,  "Study  of  Interaction  and  Consensus";  Raymond  Cattell,  "Concepts 
and  Methods  in  the  Measurement  of  Group  Syntality,"  in  Small  Groups,  cd.  A.  Paul 
Hare, Edward  F.  Borgatta,  and  Robert  F. Bales  (New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  1955); 
Leon  Festinger,  A  Theory  of  Cognitive  Dissonanu  (Evanston,  Ill.:  Row,  Peterson, 
1957);  Leon  Festinger,  Stanley  Schachter,  and  Kurt  Back,  "The  Operation  of  Group 
Standards,"  in  Group  Dynamics,  ed.  Darwin  Cartwright  and  Alvin  Zander  (Evans(cid:173)
ton,  Ill.:  Row,  Peterson,  1953);  David  B.  Truman,  The  Governmental  Process  (New 
York:  Alfred  A.  Knop£,  1958). 

The  Logic  of  Collective  Action 

60 
latent group there  will  be  no  tendency for  the group  to  organize  to 
achieve  its goals  through the voluntary,  rational action  of  the  mem(cid:173)
bers  of  the  group,  even  if  there  is  perfect  consensus.  Indeed,  the 
assumption  made  in  this  work  is  that  there  is  perfect  consensus. 
This  is,  to  be  sure,  an  unrealistic  assumption,  for  perfection  of 
consensus,  as  of  other  things,  is  at  best  very  rare.  But  the  results 
obtained under this assumption are, for  that reason,  all  the stronger, 
for  if voluntary,  rational  action cannot  enable  a  large,  latent  group 
to organize for action to achieve its collective goals, even  with perfect 
consensus,  then  a  fortiori  this  conclusion  should  hold  in  the  real 
world,  where  consensus  is  usually  incomplete  and  often  altogether 
absent. It is  thus very  important to  distingiush between the obstacles 
to group-oriented  action  that  are  due  to  a  lack  of  group  consensus 
and those  that are  due  to  a  lack  of  individual  incentives. 

C.  SOCIAL  INCE.NTIVES  AND  RATIONAL  BE.HAVIOR 

Economic incentives are not, to be sure, the only incentives;  people 
are  sometimes  also  motivated  by  a  desire  to  win  prestige,  respect, 
friendship,  and  other  social  and  psychological  objectives.  Though 
the phrase "socio-economic status" often used in discussions of status 
suggests  that  there  may  be  a  correlation  between  economic  position 
and  social  position,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  two  are  sometimes 
different. The possibility that, in a case where there was  no economic 
incentive  for  an  individual  to  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  a 
group interest, there  might nonetheless be  a social incentive  for  him 
to make such a contribution, must therefore  be  considered.  And it is 
obvious that this is  a possibility. If a small group of people  who had 
an interest in a collective good happened also to  be  personal  friends, 
or belonged to the same social  dub, and some  of the group  left  the 
burden of providing that collective good on others, they  might, even 
if they  gained economically  by  this  course  of action,  lose  socially  by 
it,  and  the  social  loss  might  outweigh  the  economic  gain.  Their 
friends might use "social pressure" to encourage them to do their part 
toward  achieving  the  group  goal,  or  the  social  club  might  exclude 
them,  and  such  steps  might  be  effective,  for  everyday  observation 
reveals  that  most  people  value  the  fellowship  of  their  friends  and 
associates,  and  value  social  status,  personal  prestige,  and self-esteem. 
The  existence  of  these  social  incentives  to  group-oriented  action 
does not, however, contradict or weaken the analysis of this study. If 

Group Size and  Group  Behavior 

61 
anything, it strengthens it,  for  social status and social acceptance are 
individual,  noncollective goods.  Social  sanctions  and  social  rewards 
are "selective incentives"; that is,  they are among the kinds of incen(cid:173)
tives that may be used to mobilize a latent group. It is in the nature of 
social  incentives  that  they  can  distinguish  among  individuals:  the 
recalcitrant  individual  can  be  ostracized,  and  the  cooperative  indi(cid:173)
vidual  can  be  invited  into  the  center  of  the  charmed  circle.  Some 
students of organizational theory have rightly emphasized that social 
incentives  must  be  analyzed  in  much  the  same  way  as  monetary 
incentives.16  Still other types  of incentives  can  be  analyzed in much 
the  same  way,l7 

16.  See  especially  Chester  1.  Barnard,  TIlt:  Functifms 0/  the  Executive  (Cambridge, 
Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1938),  chap  xi,  "The  Economy  of  Incentives," 
pp.  139-160,  and  the  same  author's  Organization  and  Management  (Cambridge, 
Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1948), chap.  ix,  "Functions  and  Pathology  of  Status 
Systems  in  Formal  Organizations,"  pp.  207-244;  Peter  B.  Clark  and  James  Q. 
Wilson,  "Incentive  Systems:  A  Theory  of  Organizations,"  Administrative  Science 
Quarterly,  VI  (September  1961),  129-166;  and  Herbert  A.  Simon,  Administrative 
BehaviQl'  (New York:  Macmillan,  1957),  esp.  pp.  115-117.  I  am  indebted  to  Edward 
C.  Banfield  for  helpful  suggestions  on  social  incentives  and  organization  theory. 

17.  In  addition  to  monetary  and  social  incentives,  there  are  also  erotic  incentives, 
psychological  incentives,  moral  incentives,  and  so  on.  To  the  extent  that  any  of  these 
types  of  incentives  leads  a  latent  group  to  obtain  a  collective  good,  it  could  again 
only  be  because  they  are  or  can  be  used  as  "selective  incentives,"  i.e.,  because  they 
distinguish  between  those  individuals  who  support  action  in  the  common  interest 
and  those  who  do  not.  Even  in  the  case  where  moral  attitudes  determine  whether 
or  not  a  person  will  act  in  a  group·oriented  way,  the  crucial  factor  is  that the  moral 
reaction  serves  as  a  "selective  incentive."  If  the  sense  of  guilt,  or  the  destruction 
of  self'esteem,  that  occurs  when  a  person  feels  he  has  forsaken  his  moral  code, 
affected  those  who  had  contributed  toward  the  achievement  of  a  group  good,  as  well 
as  those  who  had  not,  the  moral  code  could  not  help  to  mobilize  a  latent  group. 
To  repeat:  the  point  is  that  moral  attitudes  could  mobilize  a  latent  group  only  to 
the  extent  they  provided  selective  incentives.  The  adherence  to  a  moral  code  that 
demands  the  sacrifices  needed  to  obtain  a collective good  therefore  need  not contradict 
any  of  the  analysis  in  this  study;  indeed,  this  analysis  shows  the  need  for  such  a 
moral  code  or  for  some  other  selective  incentive. 

At  no  point  in  this  study,  however,  will  any  such  moral  force  or  incentive  be 
used  to  explain  any  of  the  examples  of  group  action  that  will  be  studied.  There  are 
three  reasons  for  this.  First,  it  is  not possible  to  get  empirical  proof of the  motivation 
behind  any  person's action;  it is  not  possible  definitely  to say  whether a  given  individ(cid:173)
ual  acted  for  moral  reasons  or  for  other  reasons  in  some  particular  case.  A  reliance 
on  moral  explanations  could  thus  make  the  theory  untestable.  Second,  no  such 
explanation  is  needed;  since  there  will  be  sufficient  explanations  on  other  grounds  for 
all  the  group  action  that  will  be  considered.  Third,  most  organized  pressure  groups 
are explicitly  working for  gains  for  themselves,  not gains for other groups,  and  in  such 
cases  it  is  hardly  plausible  to  ascribe  group  action  to  any  moral  code.  Moral  motives 
or  incentives  for  group  action  have  therefore  been  discussed,  not  to  explain  any 

62 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

In  general,  social  pressure  and  social  incentives  operate  only  in 
groups of smaller size,  in the groups so  small that the members  can 
have face-to-face contact with one another. Though in an oligopolistic 
industry  with  only  a  handful  of  firms  there  may  be  strong  resent(cid:173)
ment against the "chiseler" who cuts  prices to  increase his own sales 
at the expense of the group, in a perfectly competitive industry there 
is  usually  no  such  resentment;  indeed,  the  man  who  succeeds  in 
increasing  his  sales  and  output  in  a  perfectly  competitive  industry 
is  usually  admired and set up as  a good example by  his  competitors. 
Anyone who has observed a farming community, for instance, knows 
that  the  most  productive  farmer,  who  sells  the  most  and  thus  does 
the  most  to  lower  the  price,  is  usually  the  one  with  the  highest 
status.  There  are  perhaps  two  reasons  for  this  difference  in  the 
attitudes of  large and small groups. First, in  the  large,  latent group, 
each  member,  by  definition, is  so  small in relation  to  the  total  that 
his  actions  will  not  matter  much  one  way  01"  another;  so  it  would 
seem pointless for one perfect competitor, or a member of some other 
latent group, to snub or abuse another for  a selfish, antigroup action, 
because  the  recalcitrant's action  would not be  decisive  in  any  event. 
Second, in any  large group everyone cannot possibly  know everyone 
else,  and  the  group  will  ipso  facto  not  be  a  friendship  group;  so 
a person  will  ordinarily  not  be  affected  socially  if  he  fails  to  make 
sacrifices  on  behalf  of  his  group's  goals.  To  return  to  the  case  of 
the farmer,  it is  clear that one farmer  cannot  possibly  know  all  the 
other farmers  who sell  the same commodity;  he would not feel  that 
the social group within which he measured his status had much to do 
with  the  group  with  which  he  shared  the  interest  in  the  collective 
good.  Accordingly,  there  is  no  presumption  that  social  incentives 
will  lead individuals  in the  latent group to obtain  a collective  good. 
There is,  however, one case in which social incentives may  well  be 
able  to  bring about group-oriented  action  in  a latent  group.  This is 

given  example  of  group  action,  but  rather  to  show  that  their  existence  need  not 
contradict  the  theory  offered  here,  and  could  if  anything  tend  to  support  it. 

The  erotic  and  psychological  incentives  that  must  be  important  in  family  and 
friendship  groups  could  logically  be  analyzed  within  the  framework  of  the  theory. 
On  the  other  hand,  "affective"  groups  such  as  family  and  friendship  groups  could 
normally  be  studied  much  more  usefully  with  entirely  different  sorts  of  theories,  since 
the  analysis  used  in  this  study  does  not  shed  much  light  on  these  groups.  On  the 
special  features  of "affective"  groups,  see  Verba  (note  12,  above),  p.  6  and  pp.  142-
184. 

Group  Size and Group Behavior 

63 
the  case  of  a  "federal"  group-a group  divided  into  a  number  of 
small groups,  each of  which  has  a reason  to  join  with the  others  to 
form  a  federation  representing  the  large  group  as  a  whole.  If the 
central or federated  organization provides  some  service  to  the  small 
constituent  organizations,  they  may  be  induced  to  use  their  social 
incentives  to  get  the  individuals  belonging  to  each  small  group  to 
contribute  toward  the  achievement  of  the  collective  goals  of  the 
whole group. Thus, organizations  that use  selective  social  incentives 
to  mobilize  a  latent  group  interested  in  a  collective  good  must  be 
federations  of  smaller  groups.  The more important  point, however, 
is that social incentives are important mainly only in the small group, 
and  play  a role  in  the  large  group  only  when  the large  group  is  a 
federation  of  smaller  groups. 

The groups small enough to be classified here  as  "privileged" and 
"intermediate" groups  are  thus  twice  blessed  in  that they  have  not 
only economic incentives, but also perhaps social incentives, that lead 
their  members  to  work  toward  the  achievement  of  the  collective 
goods. The large, "latent" group, on the other hand, always contains 
more  people  than could possibly  know each  other,  and is  not  likely 
(except when composed of federated  small groups)  to  develop  social 
pressures  that  would  help  it satisfy  its  interest in  a  collective  good. 
There is,  of  course,  much  evidence  for  this  skepticism  about  social 
pressures  in  a  large  group  in  the  history  of  perfectly  competitive 
industries  in  the  United  States.  Now,  if  the  conclusion  that  the 
strength  of  social  pressures  varies  greatly  between  small  and  large 
groups  has  validity,  it  further  weakens  the  traditional  theory  of 
voluntary  organizations.18 

18. There  is.  however.  another  kind  of  social  pressure  that  may  occasionally  be 

operative.  That  is  the  social  pressure  that  is  generated,  not  primarily  through  person(cid:173)
to-person  friendships,  but  through  mass  media.  If the  members  of  a  latent  group  are 
somehow  continuously  bombarded  with  propaganda  about  the  worthiness  of  the 
attempt  to satisfy  the  common  interest  in  question,  they  may  perhaps  in  time  develop 
social  pressures  not  entirely  unlike  those  that  can  be  generated  in  a  face-to-face 
group,  and  these  social  pressures  may  help  the  latent  group  to  obtain  the  collective 
good.  A  group  cannot  finance  such  propaganda  unless  it  is  already  organized.  and 
it  may  not be  able  to  organize until  it has already  been  subjected  to  the  propaganda;  so 
this  form  of  social  pressure  is  probably  not  ordinarily  sufficient  by  itself  to  enable  a 
group  to  achieve  its  collective  goals.  It  would,  for  example.  seem  unlikely  that  there 
would  be  much  prospect  of success  in  a  program  to  persuade  farmers  through  propa(cid:173)
ganda  to  further  their  interests  by  voluntarily  restricting  output,  unless  there  were 
some  captive  source  of  funds  to  finance  the  effort.  So  this  form  of  social  pressure 
generated  by  mass  media  does  not  seem  likely  to  be  an  important  independent  source 

64 

The Logic  of  Collective  Action 

Some critics may protest that even  if social  pressure does  not  exist 
in  the  large or latent group,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  completely 
selfish  or  profit-maximizing  behavior,  which  the  concept  of  latent 
groups  apparently  assumes,  is  necessarily  significant  either;  people 
might even in the absence of social pressure act in a selfless  way. But 
this criticism of the  concept  of the  latent  group  is  not  relevant,  for 
that concept does  not necessarily  assume  the  selfish,  profit-maximiz(cid:173)
ing behavior  that  economists  usually  find  in  the  marketplace.  The 
concept of the large or latent group  offered here  holds  true  whether 
behavior  is  selfish  or  unselfish,  so  long  as  it  is  strictly  speaking 
"rational." Even if the member of  a large group  were to  neglect  his 
own  interests  entirely,  he  still  would  not  rationally  contribute 
toward  the  provision  of  any  collective  or  public  good,  since  his 
own  contribution  would  not  be  perceptible.  A  farmer  who  placed 
the  interests  of  other farmers  above  his  own  would  not  necessarily 
restrict  his  production  to  raise  farm  prices,  since  he  would  know 
that  his  sacrifice  would  not  bring  a  noticeable  benefit  to  anyone. 
Such  a  rational  farmer,  however  unselfish,  would  not  make  such 
a futile and pointless sacrifice, but he  would allocate his philanthropy 
in order to have a perceptible effect on someone. Selfless behavior that 
has  no  perceptible  effect  is  sometimes  not  even  considered  praise(cid:173)
worthy.  A  man  who  tried  to  hold  back  a  flood  with  a  pail  would 
probably  be  considered  more  of  a crank  than  a saint,  even  by  those 
he was trying to help. It is no doubt possible infinitesimally to lower 
the  level  of  a  river  in  flood  with  a  pail,  just  as  it  is  possible  for  a 
single  farmer  infinitesimally  to  raise  prices  by  limiting  his  produc(cid:173)
tion,  but  in  both  cases  the  effect  is  imperceptible,  and  those  who 
sacrifice  themselves  in  the  interest  of  imperceptible  improvements 
may  not even  receive  the praise  normally  due selfless  behavior. 

The argument about large, latent groups, then, does not necessarily 
imply self-interested  behavior,  though such  behavior would  be  com(cid:173)
pletely consistent with it.19 The only requirement is that the behavior 

of coordinated  effort  to  bring  about  the  satisfaction  of  a  common  interest.  Moreover, 
as  was  emphasized  earlier,  the  nation-state,  with  all  the  emotional  loyalty  it  com(cid:173)
mands,  cannot  support  itself  without  compulsion.  Therefore  it  does  not  seem  likely 
that many  large private groups could support themselves  solely  through social  pressure. 

19.  Organizations with  primarily economic  purposes,  like  tabor  unions,  farm  organ(cid:173)

izations,  and  other  types  of  pressure groups,  normally  claim  that  they  are  serving  the 
interests  of  the  groups  they  represent,  and  do  not  contend  that  they  are  mainly 
philanthropic  organizations  out  to  help  other  groups.  Thus  it  would  be  surprising  if 

Group Size and Group  Behavior 

65 

of individuals in large groups or organizations of the kind considered 
should generally be rational, in the sense that their objectives, whether 
selfish  or  unselfish,  should  be  pursued  by  means  that  are  efficient 
and effective  for  achieving  these  objectives. 

The foregoing  arguments,  theoretical  and factual,  in  this  and  the 
previous chapter should at the least justify the separate treatment that 
large and small groups  are given in  this  study. These arguments  are 
not  meant  as  attacks  on  any  previous  interpretations  of  group  be(cid:173)
havior, though it seems  that  some of the  usual explanations of large 
voluntary  associations  may  need  elaboration  because  of the  theories 
offered here. All that need be  granted, to  accept  the  main  argument 
of this  study, is  that  large or latent groups  will  not organize  for  co(cid:173)
ordinated  action  merely  because,  as  a group,  they  have  a  reason  for 
doing so,  though this  could be  true of smaller  groups. 

Most  of  the  rest  of  this  study  will  deal  with  large  organizations 

and will attempt to prove that most of the large economic organiza(cid:173)
tions in the United States have  had to  develop  special institutions  to 
solve  the  membership  problem  posed  by  the  large  scale  of  their 
objectives. 

most  of  the  members  of  these  "interest  groups"  should  always  neglect  their  own, 
individual  interests.  An  essentially  selfish  group  interest  would  not  normally  attract 
members  who  were  completely  selfless.  Thus  self-interested  behavior  may  in  fact  be 
common in  organizations  of the  kind  under  study.  For intelligent  arguments  contend(cid:173)
ing  that  self-interested  behavior  is  general  in  politics,  see  James  M.  Buchanan  and 
Gordon  Tullock,  Thl!  Calculus  of Consl!nt  (Ann  Arbor:  University  of  Michigan  Press, 
1962),  pp.  3-39.  Sce  also  the  interesting  book  by  Anthony  Downs,  An  Economic 
Thl!ory  of  Dl!mocracy  (New  York:  Harper,  1957),  pp.  3-35. 

