NO ˆUS 41:4 (2007) 663–685

Moral Responsibility and Determinism:
The Cognitive Science of Folk Intuitions

SHAUN NICHOLS

Department of Philosophy, University of Arizona

Department of Philosophy, University of North Carolina

JOSHUA KNOBE

1. Introduction

The dispute between compatibilists and incompatibilists must be one of the
most persistent and heated deadlocks in Western philosophy. Incompatibilists
maintain that people are not fully morally responsible if determinism is true,
i.e., if every event is an inevitable consequence of the prior conditions and
the natural laws. By contrast, compatibilists maintain that even if determin-
ism is true our moral responsibility is not undermined in the slightest, for
determinism and moral responsibility are perfectly consistent.1

The debate between these two positions has invoked many different re-
sources, including quantum mechanics, social psychology, and basic meta-
physics. But recent discussions have relied heavily on arguments that draw on
people’s intuitions about particular cases. Some philosophers have claimed
that people have incompatibilist intuitions (e.g., Kane 1999, 218; Strawson
1986, 30; Vargas 2006); others have challenged this claim and suggested that
people’s intuitions actually fit with compatibilism (Nahmias et al. 2005). But
although philosophers have constructed increasingly sophisticated arguments
about the implications of people’s intuitions, there has been remarkably lit-
tle discussion about why people have the intuitions they do. That is to say,
relatively little has been said about the specific psychological processes that
generate or sustain people’s intuitions. And yet, it seems clear that questions
about the sources of people’s intuitions could have a major impact on debates

C(cid:2) 2007, Copyright the Authors
Journal compilation C(cid:2) 2007, Blackwell Publishing, Inc.

663

664 NO ˆUS

about the compatibility of responsibility and determinism. There is an obvi-
ous sense in which it is important to figure out whether people’s intuitions
are being produced by a process that is generally reliable or whether they are
being distorted by a process that generally leads people astray.

Our aim here is to present and defend a hypothesis about the processes
that generate people’s intuitions concerning moral responsibility. Our hy-
pothesis is that people have an incompatibilist theory of moral responsibility
that is elicited in some contexts but that they also have psychological mech-
anisms that can lead them to arrive at compatibilist judgments in other con-
texts.2 To support this hypothesis, we report new experimental data. These
data show that people’s responses to questions about moral responsibility
can vary dramatically depending on the way in which the question is for-
mulated. When asked questions that call for a more abstract, theoretical
sort of cognition, people give overwhelmingly incompatibilist answers. But
when asked questions that trigger emotions, their answers become far more
compatibilist.

2. Affect, Blame, and the Attribution of Responsibility

In their attempts to get a handle on folk concepts and folk theories, natu-
ralistic philosophers have proceeded by looking at people’s intuitions about
particular cases (e.g., Knobe 2003a, 2003b; Nahmias et al. 2005; Nichols
2004a; Weinberg et al. 2001; Woolfolk et al. 2006). The basic technique is
simple. The philosopher constructs a hypothetical scenario and then asks
people whether, for instance, the agent in the scenario is morally responsible.
By varying the details of the case and checking to see how people’s intuitions
are affected, one can gradually get a sense for the contours of the folk theory.
This method is a good one, but it must be practiced with care. One cannot
simply assume that all of the relevant intuitions are generated by the same
underlying folk theory. It is always possible that different intuitions will turn
out to have been generated by different psychological processes.

Here we will focus especially on the role of affect in generating intuitions
about moral responsibility. Our hypothesis is that, when people are con-
fronted with a story about an agent who performs a morally bad behavior,
this can trigger an immediate emotional response, and this emotional re-
sponse can play a crucial role in their intuitions about whether the agent was
morally responsible. In fact, people may sometimes declare such an agent
to be morally responsible despite the fact that they embrace a theory of
responsibility on which the agent is not responsible.

Consider, for example, Watson’s (1987) interesting discussion of the crimes
of Robert Harris. Watson provides long quotations from a newspaper article
about how Harris savagely murdered innocent people, showing no remorse
for what he had done. Then he describes, in equally chilling detail, the hor-
rible abuse Harris had to endure as he was growing up. After reading all of

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 665

these vivid details, it would be almost impossible for a reader to respond by
calmly working out the implications of his or her theory of moral responsi-
bility. Any normal reader will have a rich array of reactions, including not
only abstract theorizing but also feelings of horror and disgust. A reader’s in-
tuitions about such a case might be swayed by her emotions, leaving her with
a conclusion that contravened her more abstract, theoretical beliefs about the
nature of moral responsibility.

Still, it might be thought that this sort of effect would be unlikely to influ-
ence people’s reactions to ordinary philosophical examples. Most philosoph-
ical examples are purely hypothetical and thinly described (often only a few
sentences in length). To a first glance at least, it might seem that emotional
reactions are unlikely to have any impact on people’s intuitions about exam-
ples like these. But a growing body of experimental evidence indicates that
this commonsense view is mistaken. This evidence suggests that affect plays
an important role even in people’s intuitions about thinly described, purely
hypothetical cases (Blair 1995; Greene et al. 2001; Nichols 2002; Haidt et al.
1993).

It may seem puzzling that affect should play such a powerful role, and
a number of different models of the role of emotion in evaluative thought
have been proposed. We will discuss some of these models in further detail in
sections 5, 6, and 7. In the meantime, we want to point to one factor that ap-
pears to influence people’s affective reactions. A recent study by Smart and
Loewenstein (forthcoming) shows that when a transgressor is made more
‘determinate’ for subjects, subjects experience greater negative affect and are
more punitive towards that agent as a result. In the study, subjects play a
game in which they can privately cooperate or defect. Each subject is as-
signed an identifying number, but none of the subjects knows anyone else’s
number. The experimenter puts the numbers of the defectors into an enve-
lope. The cooperators are subsequently allowed to decide whether to penalize
a defector. The cooperator is informed that he will pick a number out of the
envelope to determine which defector will be penalized (or not). The ma-
nipulation was unbelievably subtle. In the indeterminate condition, subjects
decide how much to penalize before they draw the number; in the determi-
nate condition, subjects decide how much to penalize after they draw the
number. Despite this tiny difference, Smart and Loewenstein found a signifi-
cant effect—subjects in the determinate condition gave worse penalties than
subjects in the indeterminate condition. Furthermore, subjects filled out a
self-report questionnaire on how much anger, blame, and sympathy they felt,
and subjects in the determinate condition felt more anger and blame than
subjects in the indeterminate condition. Finally, using mediational statistical
analysis, Smart and Loewenstein found that determinateness impacts puni-
tiveness by virtue of provoking stronger emotions.

As we shall see, previous studies of people’s moral responsibility intu-
itions all featured determinate agents and therefore were designed in a way

666 NO ˆUS

that would tend to trigger affective reactions. Our own study provides an
opportunity to see how people’s intuitions are altered when the stimuli are
designed in a way that keeps affective reactions to a minimum.

3. Intuitions About Free Will and Responsibility

Incompatibilist philosophers have traditionally claimed both that ordinary
people believe that human decisions are not governed by deterministic laws
and that ordinary people believe that determinism is incompatible with moral
responsibility (e.g., Kane 1999; Strawson 1986). These claims have been
based, not on systematic empirical research, but rather on anecdote and
informal observation. For example, Kane writes, “In my experience, most or-
dinary persons start out as natural incompatibilists” (1999, 217). (As will be
clear below, we think Kane is actually getting at something deep about our
intuitions here.) In recent years, philosophers have sought to put claims like
this one to the test using experimental methods. The results have sometimes
been surprising.

First, consider the claim that ordinary people believe that human decisions
are not governed by deterministic laws. In a set of experiments exploring the
lay understanding of choice, both children and adults tended to treat moral
choices as indeterminist (Nichols 2004a). Participants were presented with
cases of moral choice events (e.g., a girl steals a candy bar) and physical
events (e.g., a pot of water comes to a boil), and they were asked whether, if
everything in the world was the same right up until the event occurred, the
event had to occur. Both children and adults were more likely to say that the
physical event had to occur than that the moral choice event had to occur.
This result seems to vindicate the traditional claim that ordinary people in
our culture believe that at least some human decisions are not determined.
Experimental study has not been so kind to the traditional claim that or-
dinary people are incompatibilists about responsibility. Woolfolk, Doris and
Darley (2006) gave participants a story about an agent who is captured by
kidnappers and given a powerful ‘compliance drug.’ The drug makes it im-
possible for him to disobey orders. The kidnappers order him to perform an
immoral action, and he cannot help but obey. Subjects in the ‘low identifica-
tion condition’ were told that the agent did not want to perform the immoral
action and was only performing it because he had been given the compliance
drug. Subjects in the ‘high identification condition’ were told that the agent
wanted to perform the immoral action all along and felt no reluctance about
performing it. The results showed a clear effect of identification: subjects in
the high identification condition gave higher ratings of responsibility for the
agent than subjects in the low identification condition. This result fits beauti-
fully with the compatibilist view that responsibility depends on identification
(e.g. Frankfurt 1988). However, subjects in both conditions showed an overall
tendency to give low ratings of responsibility for the agent. So these results

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 667

don’t pose a direct threat to the view that people are incompatibilists about
responsibility.

The final set of studies we’ll review poses a greater problem for the view
that people are intuitive incompatibilists. Nahmias, Morris, Nadelhoffer and
Turner (2005) find that participants will hold an agent morally responsible
even when they are told to assume that the agent is in a deterministic universe.
For instance, they presented participants with the following scenario:

Imagine that in the next century we discover all the laws of nature, and we
build a supercomputer which can deduce from these laws of nature and from
the current state of everything in the world exactly what will be happening in
the world at any future time. It can look at everything about the way the world
is and predict everything about how it will be with 100% accuracy. Suppose
that such a supercomputer existed, and it looks at the state of the universe at a
certain time on March 25th, 2150 A.D., twenty years before Jeremy Hall is born.
The computer then deduces from this information and the laws of nature that
Jeremy will definitely rob Fidelity Bank at 6:00 PM on January 26th, 2195. As
always, the supercomputer’s prediction is correct; Jeremy robs Fidelity Bank at
6:00 PM on January 26th, 2195.

Participants were subsequently asked whether Jeremy is morally blamewor-
thy for robbing the bank. The results were striking: 83% of subjects said that
Jeremy was morally blameworthy for robbing the bank. In two additional
experiments with different scenarios, similar effects emerged, suggesting that
lay people regard moral responsibility as compatible with determinism. These
findings are fascinating, and we will try to build on them in our own
experiments.

Of course, it is possible to challenge the experiments on methodological
grounds. For instance, the scenarios use technical vocabulary (e.g., “laws of
nature,” “current state”), and one might wonder whether the subjects really
understood the scenarios. Further, one might complain that determinism is
not made sufficiently salient in the scenarios. The story of the supercomputer
focuses on the predictability of events in the universe, and many philoso-
phers have taken the predictability of the universe to be less threatening to
free will than causal inevitability. Although one might use these method-
ological worries to dismiss the results, we are not inclined to do so. For we
think that Nahmias and colleagues have tapped into something of genuine
interest.3 They report three quite different scenarios that produce much the
same effect. In each of their experiments, most people (60–85%) say that
the agent is morally responsible even under the assumption that determin-
ism is true. Moreover, the results coincide with independent psychological
work on the assignment of punishment. Viney and colleagues found that
college students who were identified as determinists were no less punitive
than indeterminists (Viney et al. 1982) and no less likely to offer retributivist

668 NO ˆUS

justifications for punishments (Viney et al. 1988).4 So, we will assume that
Nahmias et al. are right that when faced with an agent intentionally doing a
bad action in a deterministic setting, people tend to hold the agent morally
responsible.

But if people so consistently give compatibilist responses on experimental
questionnaires, why have some philosophers concluded that ordinary people
are incompatibilists?5 Have these philosophers simply been failing to listen to
their own undergraduate students? We suspect that something more complex
is going on. On our view, most people (at least in our culture) really do
hold incompatibilist theories of moral responsibility, and these theories can
easily be brought out in the kinds of philosophical discussions that arise, e.g.,
in university seminars. It’s just that, in addition to these theories of moral
responsibility, people also have immediate affective reactions to stories about
immoral behaviors. What we see in the results of the experiments by Nahmias
and colleagues is, in part, the effect of these affective reactions. To uncover
people’s underlying theories, we need to offer them questions that call for
more abstract, theoretical cognition.

4. Experimental Evidence: First Phase

We conducted a series of experiments to explore whether participants will be
more likely to report incompatibilist intuitions if the emotional and motiva-
tional factors are minimized. In each experiment, one condition, the concrete
condition, was designed to elicit greater affective response; the other con-
dition, the abstract condition, was designed to trigger abstract, theoretical
cognition. We predicted that people would be more likely to respond as com-
patibilists in the concrete condition.

Before we present the details of the experiments, we should note that
there are many ways to characterize determinism. The most precise charac-
terizations involve technical language about, for example, the laws of nature.
However, we think it’s a mistake to use technical terminology for these sorts
of experiments, and we therefore tried to present the issue in more accessible
language.6 Of course, any attempt to translate complex philosophical issues
into simpler terms will raise difficult questions. It is certainly possible that the
specific description of determinism used in our study biased people’s intu-
itions in one direction or another. Perhaps the overall rate of incompatibilist
responses would have been somewhat higher or lower if we had used a subtly
different formulation.

One should keep in mind, however, that our main focus here is on the
difference between people’s responses in the concrete condition and their
responses in the abstract condition. Even though we use exactly the same
description of determinism in these two conditions, we predict that people
will give compatibilist responses in the concrete condition and incompatibilist

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 669

responses in the abstract condition. Such an effect could not be dismissed as
an artifact of our description of determinism. If a difference actually does
emerge, we will therefore have good evidence for the view that affect is playing
some role in people’s compatibilist intuitions.

All of our studies were conducted on undergraduates at the University of
Utah,7 and all of the studies began with the same setup. Participants were
given the following description of a determinist universe and an indeterminist
universe:

Imagine a universe (Universe A) in which everything that happens is completely
caused by whatever happened before it. This is true from the very beginning of
the universe, so what happened in the beginning of the universe caused what
happened next, and so on right up until the present. For example one day John
decided to have French Fries at lunch. Like everything else, this decision was
completely caused by what happened before it. So, if everything in this universe
was exactly the same up until John made his decision, then it had to happen that
John would decide to have French Fries.

Now imagine a universe (Universe B) in which almost everything that happens is
completely caused by whatever happened before it. The one exception is human
decision making. For example, one day Mary decided to have French Fries
at lunch. Since a person’s decision in this universe is not completely caused
by what happened before it, even if everything in the universe was exactly the
same up until Mary made her decision, it did not have to happen that Mary
would decide to have French Fries. She could have decided to have something
different.

The key difference, then, is that in Universe A every decision is completely
caused by what happened before the decision—given the past, each decision
has to happen the way that it does. By contrast, in Universe B, decisions are not
completely caused by the past, and each human decision does not have to happen
the way that it does.

1. Which of these universes do you think is most like ours? (circle one)

Universe A

Universe B

Please briefly explain your answer:

The purpose of this initial question was simply to see whether subjects believe
that our own universe is deterministic or indeterministic. Across conditions,
nearly all participants (over 90%) judged that the indeterministic universe is
most similar to our own.

After answering the initial question, subjects received a question designed
to test intuitions about compatibilism and incompatibilism. Subjects were
randomly assigned either to the concrete condition or to the abstract condi-
tion. We ran several different versions, but we will focus on the most impor-
tant ones. In one of our concrete conditions, subjects were given the following
question:

670 NO ˆUS

In Universe A, a man named Bill has become attracted to his secretary, and he
decides that the only way to be with her is to kill his wife and 3 children. He
knows that it is impossible to escape from his house in the event of a fire. Before
he leaves on a business trip, he sets up a device in his basement that burns down
the house and kills his family.

Is Bill fully morally responsible for killing his wife and children?

YES

NO

In this condition, most subjects (72%) gave the compatibilist response that the
agent was fully morally responsible. This is comparable to results obtained
in experiments by Nahmias and colleagues. But now consider one of our
abstract conditions:

In Universe A, is it possible for a person to be fully morally responsible for their
actions?

YES

NO

In this condition, most subjects (86%) gave the incompatibilist response!

In short, most people give the compatibilist response to the concrete case,
but the vast majority give the incompatibilist response to the abstract case.
What on earth could explain this dramatic difference? Let’s first consider a de-
flationary possibility. Perhaps the concrete condition is so long and complex
that subjects lose track of the fact that the agent is in a determinist uni-
verse. This is a perfectly sensible explanation. To see whether this accounts
for the difference, we ran another concrete condition in which the scenario
was short and simple. Subjects were given all the same initial descriptions
and then given the following question:

In Universe A, Bill stabs his wife and children to death so that he can be with
his secretary. Is it possible that Bill is fully morally responsible for killing his
family?

YES

NO

Even in this simple scenario, 50% of subjects gave the compatibilist response,
which is still significantly different from the very low number of compatibilist
responses in the abstract condition.8

As we noted above, there are many ways of describing determinism, and
the overall rate of incompatibilist responses might have been higher or lower
if we had used a somewhat different description. Still, one cannot plausibly
dismiss the high rate of incompatibilist responses in the abstract condition as
a product of some subtle bias in our description of determinism. After all, the

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 671

concrete condition used precisely the same description, and yet subjects in
that condition were significantly more likely to give compatibilist responses.9
These initial experiments replicated the finding (originally due to Nahmias
et al.) that people have compatibilist intuitions when presented with vignettes
that trigger affective responses. But they also yielded a new and surprising
result. When subjects were presented with an abstract vignette, they had
predominantly incompatibilist intuitions. This pattern of results suggests that
affect is playing a key role in generating people’s compatibilist intuitions.

5. Psychological Models

Thus far, we have been providing evidence for the claim that different folk
intuitions about responsibility are produced by different kinds of psycholog-
ical processes. But if it is indeed the case that one sort of process leads to
compatibilist intuitions and another leads to incompatibilist intuitions, which
sort of process should we regard as the best guide to the true relationship
between moral responsibility and determinism?

Before we can address this question, we need to know a little bit more
about the specific psychological processes that might underlie different types
of folk intuitions. We therefore consider a series of possible models. We begin
by looking at three extremely simple models and then go on to consider ways
that elements of these simple models might be joined together to form more
complex models.

The Performance Error Model
Perhaps the most obvious way of explaining the data reported here would
be to suggest that strong affective reactions can bias and distort people’s
judgments. On this view, people ordinarily make responsibility judgments by
relying on a tacit theory, but when they are faced with a truly egregious vi-
olation of moral norms (as in our concrete cases), they experience a strong
affective reaction which makes them unable to apply the theory correctly. In
short, this hypothesis posits an affective performance error. That is, it draws
a distinction between people’s underlying representations of the criteria for
moral responsibility and the performance systems that enable them to apply
those criteria to particular cases. It then suggests that people’s affective reac-
tions are interfering with the normal operation of the performance systems.
The performance error model draws support from the vast literature in
social psychology on the interaction between affect and theoretical cogni-
tion. This literature has unearthed numerous ways in which people’s affective
reactions can interfere with their ability to reason correctly. Under the influ-
ence of affective or motivational biases, people are less likely to recall certain
kinds of relevant information, less likely to believe unwanted evidence, and
less likely to use critical resources to attack conclusions that are motivation-
ally neutral (see Kunda 1990 for a review). Given that we find these biases in

672 NO ˆUS

so many other aspects of cognition, it is only natural to conclude that they
can be found in moral responsibility judgments as well.

More pointedly, there is evidence that affect sometimes biases attributions
of responsibility. Lerner and colleagues found that when subjects’ negative
emotions are aroused, they hold agents more responsible and more deserving
of punishment, even when the negative emotions are aroused by an unrelated
event (Lerner et al. 1998). In their study, subjects in the anger condition
watched a video clip of a bully beating up a teenager, while subjects in the
emotion-neutral condition watched a video clip of abstract figures (Lerner
et al. 1998, 566). All subjects were then presented with what they were told was
a different experiment designed to examine how people assess responsibility
for negligent behaviors. Subjects in the anger condition (i.e., those who had
been seen the bully video) gave higher responsibility ratings than subjects
in the emotion-neutral condition. So, although the subjects’ emotions were
induced by the film, these emotions impacted their responsibility judgments
in unrelated scenarios. The most natural way to interpret this result is that the
emotion served to bias the reasoning people used in making their assessments
of responsibility.

Proponents of the performance error model might suggest that a similar
phenomenon is at work in the experiments we have reported here. They would
concede that people give compatibilist responses under certain circumstances,
but they would deny that there is any real sense in which people can be said to
hold a compatibilist view of moral responsibility. Instead, they would claim
that the compatibilist responses we find in our concrete conditions are to
be understood in terms of performance errors brought about by affective
reactions. In the abstract condition, people’s underlying theory is revealed
for what it is—incompatibilist.

Affective Competence Model
There is, however, another possible way of understanding the role of affect
in the assessment of moral responsibility. Instead of supposing that affect
serves only to bias or distort our theoretical judgments, one might suggest that
people’s affective reactions actually lie at the core of the process by which they
ordinarily assign responsibility. Perhaps people normally make responsibility
judgments by experiencing an affective reaction which, in combination with
certain other processes, enables an assessment of moral responsibility. Of
course, it can hardly be denied that some people also have elaborate theories
of moral responsibility and that they use these theories in certain activities
(e.g., in writing philosophy papers), but the proponents of this second view
would deny that people’s cold cognitive theories of responsibility play any
real role in the process by means of which they normally make responsibility
judgments. This process, they would claim, is governed primarily by affect.
This ‘affective competence’ view gains some support from recent studies
of people with deficits in emotional processing due to psychological illnesses.

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 673

When these people are given questions that require moral judgments, they
sometimes offer bizarre patterns of responses (Blair 1995; Blair et al. 1997;
Hauser et al. 2006). In other words, when we strip away the capacity for
affective reactions, it seems that we are not left with a person who can apply
the fundamental criteria of morality in an especially impartial or unbiased
fashion. Instead, we seem to be left with someone who has trouble under-
standing what morality is all about. Results from studies like these have led
some researchers to conclude that affect must be playing an important role
in the fundamental competence underlying people’s moral judgments (Blair
1995; Haidt 2001; Nichols 2004b; Prinz 2007).

Proponents of this view might suggest that the only way to really get a
handle on people’s capacity for moral judgment is to look at their responses
in cases that provoke affective reactions. When we examine these cases, people
seem to show a marked tendency to offer compatibilist responses, and it might
therefore be suggested that the subjects in our studies should be regarded as
compatibilists. Of course, we have also provided data indicating that these
subjects provide incompatibilist answers when given theoretical questions,
but it might be felt that studying people’s theoretical beliefs tells us little or
nothing about how they really go about making moral judgments. (Think
of what would happen if we tried to study the human capacity for language
by asking people theoretical questions about the principles of syntax!) Thus,
affective competency theorists might maintain that the best way to describe
our findings would be to say that people’s fundamental moral competence
is a compatibilist one but that some people happen to subscribe to a theory
that contradicts this fundamental competence.

Concrete Competence Model
Finally, we need to consider the possibility that people’s responses are not
being influenced by affect in any way. Perhaps people’s responses in the con-
crete conditions are actually generated by a purely cognitive process. Even
if we assume that the process at work here can only be applied to concrete
cases, we should not necessarily conclude that it makes essential use of affect.
It might turn out that we have an entirely cognitive, affect-free process that,
for whatever reason, can be applied to concrete questions but not to abstract
ones.

One particularly appealing version of this hypothesis would be that peo-
ple’s intuitions in the concrete conditions are generated by an innate ‘moral
responsibility module.’10 This module could take as input information about
an agent and his or her behavior and then produce as output an intuition as
to whether or not that agent is morally responsible. Presumably, the module
would not use the same kinds of processes that are used in conscious rea-
soning. Instead, it would use a process that is swift, automatic, and entirely
unconscious.

674 NO ˆUS

Here, the key idea is that only limited communication is possible between
the module and the rest of the mind. The module takes as input certain very
specific kinds of information about the agent (the fact that the agent is a
human being, the fact that he knows what he is doing, etc.), but the vast
majority of the person’s beliefs would be entirely inaccessible to processes
taking place inside of the module. Thus, the module would not be able to
make use of the person’s theory about the relationship between determinism
and moral responsibility. It might not even be able to make use of the person’s
belief that the agent is in a deterministic universe. Because these beliefs would
be inaccessible inside of the module, the conclusions of the module could
differ dramatically from the conclusions that the person would reach after a
process of conscious consideration.

Hybrid Models
Thus far, we have been considering three simple models of responsibility attri-
bution. It would be possible, however, to construct more complex models by
joining together elements of the three simple ones we have already presented.
So, for example, it might turn out that moral responsibility judgments are
subserved by a module but that the workings of this module are sometimes
plagued with affective performance errors, or that the fundamental compe-
tence underlying responsibility judgments makes essential use of affect but
that this affect somehow serves as input to a module, and many other possible
hybrids might be suggested here.

Since we are unable to consider all of the possible hybrid models, we will
focus on one that we find especially plausible. On the hybrid model we will be
discussing, affect plays two distinct roles in the assignment of moral respon-
sibility. Specifically, affect serves both as part of the fundamental competence
underlying responsibility judgments and as a factor that can sometimes lead
to performance errors. To get a sense for what we mean here, imagine that
you are trying to determine whether certain poems should be regarded as
‘moving,’ and now suppose you discover that one of the poems was actually
written by your best friend. Here, it seems that the basic competence under-
lying your judgment would involve one sort of affect (your feelings about
the poems) but the performance systems enabling your judgment could be
derailed by another sort of affect (your feelings about the friend). The hybrid
model in question would suggest that a similar sort of process takes place
in judgments of moral responsibility. The competence underlying these judg-
ments does make use of affect, but affect can also be implicated in processes
that ultimately lead to performance errors.

Proponents of this model might suggest that affect does play an important
role in the competence underlying moral responsibility judgments but that
the effect obtained in the experiments reported here should still be treated as
a performance error.11 In other words, even if we suppose that affect has an
important role to play in moral responsibility judgments, we can still conclude

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 675

that the basic competence underlying these judgments is an incompatibilist
one and that the responses we find in our concrete conditions are the result
of a failure to apply that competence correctly.

6. Experimental Evidence: Second Phase

Now that we have described some of the psychological models that might
explain our results, we can explore a bit more deeply whether experimental
evidence counts against any of the models. One key question is whether or not
the compatibilist responses in our experiments are really the product of affect.
We compared concrete conditions with abstract conditions, and we suggested
that the concrete descriptions triggered greater affective response, which in
turn pushed subjects toward compatibilist responses. However, it’s possible
that what really mattered was concreteness itself, not any affect associated
with concreteness. That is, it’s possible that the compatibilist responses were
not influenced by affect but were elicited simply because the scenario involved
a particular act by a particular individual. Indeed, this is exactly the sort
of explanation one would expect from the responsibility module account.
Fortunately, there is a direct way to test this proposal.

To explore whether concreteness alone can explain the compatibilist re-
sponses, we ran another experiment in which the affective salience varied
across the two questions, but concreteness was held constant. Again, all sub-
jects were given the initial descriptions of the two universes, A and B, and all
subjects were asked which universe they thought was most similar to ours.
Subjects were randomly assigned either to the high affect or low affect con-
dition. In the high affect condition, subjects were asked the following:

As he has done many times in the past, Bill stalks and rapes a stranger. Is it
possible that Bill is fully morally responsible for raping the stranger?

In the low affect condition, subjects were asked:

As he has done many times in the past, Mark arranges to cheat on his taxes. Is
it possible that Mark is fully morally responsible for cheating on his taxes?

In addition, in each condition, for half of the subjects, the question stipulated
that the agent was in Universe A; for the other half the agent was in Universe
B. Thus, each subject was randomly assigned to one of the cells in Table 1.
What did we find? Even when we used these exclusively concrete scenarios,
there was a clear difference between the high affect and low affect cases.
Among subjects who were asked about agents in a determinist universe, people
were much more likely to give the incompatibilist answer in the low affect case
than in the high affect case. Indeed, most people said that it is not possible
that the tax cheat is fully morally responsible, and a clear majority said that it

676 NO ˆUS

Table 1. Experimental Design.

is possible that the rapist is fully morally responsible. By contrast, for subjects
who were asked about an agent in an indeterminist universe, most people said
that it is possible for the agent to be fully morally responsible, regardless of
whether he was a tax cheat or a rapist.12 See Table 2.

These results help to clarify the role that affect plays in people’s respon-
sibility attributions Even when we control for concreteness, we still find that
affect impacts people’s intuitions about responsibility under determinism.
The overall pattern of results therefore suggests that affect is playing an im-
portant role in the process that generates people’s compatibilist intuitions.

We now have good evidence that affect plays a role in compatibilist judg-
ments. But there remains the difficult question of whether what we see in
these responses is the result of an affective competence or an affective per-
formance error. Let’s consider whether one of these models provides a better
explanation of the experiment we just reported.

We think that the affective performance error model provides quite a plau-
sible explanation of our results. What we see in the tax cheat case is that, when
affect is minimized, people give dramatically different answers depending on
whether the agent is in a determinist or indeterminist universe. On the per-
formance error hypothesis, these responses reveal the genuine competence
with responsibility attribution, for in the low affect cases, the affective bias
is minimized. When high affect is introduced, as in the serial rapist case, the

Table 2. Experimental Results.

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 677

normal competence with responsibility attribution is skewed by the emotions;
that explains why there is such a large difference between the high and low
affect cases in the determinist conditions.

Now let’s turn to the affective competence account. It’s much less clear
that the affective competence theorist has a good explanation of the results.
In particular, it seems difficult to see how the affective competence account
can explain why responses to the low-affect case drop precipitously in the
determinist condition, since this doesn’t hold for the high affect case. Perhaps
the affective competence theorist could say that low affect cases like the tax
cheat case fail to trigger our competence with responsibility attribution, and
so we should not treat those responses as reflecting our normal competence.
But obviously it would take significant work to show that such everyday cases
of apparent responsibility attribution don’t really count as cases in which we
exercise our competence at responsibility attribution. Thus, at first glance,
the performance error account provides a better explanation of these results
than the affective competence account.

Of course even if it is true that our results are best explained by the per-
formance error account, this doesn’t mean that affect is irrelevant to the
normal competence. As noted in the previous section, one option that strikes
us as quite plausible is a hybrid account on which (i) our normal compe-
tence with responsibility attribution does depend on affective systems, but
(ii) affect also generates a bias leading to compatibilist responses in our
experiments.

Although our experiment provides some reason to favor the performance
error account of the compatibilist responses we found, it seems clear that
deciding between the affective performance error and the affective compe-
tence models of compatibilist responses is not the sort of issue that will be
resolved by a single crucial experiment. What we really need here is a deeper
understanding of the role that affect plays in moral cognition more generally.
(Presumably, if we had a deeper understanding of this more general issue,
we would be able to do a better job of figuring out how empirical studies
could address the specific question about the role of affect in judgments of
moral responsibility.) But our inability to resolve all of the relevant questions
immediately is no cause for pessimism. On the contrary, we see every reason
to be optimistic about the prospects for research in this area. Recent years
have seen a surge of interest in the ways in which affect can influence moral
cognition—with new empirical studies and theoretical developments coming
in all the time—and it seems likely that the next few years will yield important
new insights into the question at hand.

7. Philosophical Implications

Our findings help to explain why the debate between compatibilists and in-
compatibilists is so stubbornly persistent. It seems that certain psychological

678 NO ˆUS

processes tend to generate compatibilist intuitions, while others tend to gen-
erate incompatibilist intuitions. Thus, each of the two major views appeals
to an element of our psychological makeup.

But the experimental results do not serve merely to give us insight into
the causal origins of certain philosophical positions; they also help us to
evaluate some of the arguments that have been put forward in support of
those positions. After all, many of these arguments rely on explicit appeals
to intuition. If we find that different intuitions are produced by different
psychological mechanisms, we might conclude that some of these intuitions
should be given more weight than others. What we need to know now is which
intuitions to take seriously and which to dismiss as products of mechanisms
that are only leading us astray.

Clearly, the answer will depend partly on which, if any, of the three models
described above turns out to be the right one, and since we don’t yet have
the data we need to decide between these competing models, we will not be
able to offer a definite conclusion here. Our approach will therefore be to
consider each of the models in turn and ask what implications it would have
(if it turned out to be correct) for broader philosophical questions about the
role of intuitions in the debate over moral responsibility.

Performance Error Model
If compatibilist intuitions are explained by the performance error model, then
we shouldn’t assign much weight to these intuitions. For on that model, as
we have described it, compatibilist intuitions are a product of the distorting
effects of emotion and motivation. If we could eliminate the performance
errors, the compatibilist intuitions should disappear.

Note that the performance error model does not claim that people’s com-
patibilist intuitions are actually incorrect. What it says is simply that the
process that generates these intuitions involves a certain kind of error. It is
certainly possible that, even though the process involves this error, it ends up
yielding a correct conclusion. Still, we feel that the performance error model
has important philosophical implications. At the very least, it suggests that
the fact that people sometimes have compatibilist intuitions does not itself
give us reason to suppose that compatibilism is correct.

The philosophical implications of the performance error model have a
special significance because the experimental evidence gathered thus far seems
to suggest that the basic idea behind this model is actually true. But the jury is
still out. Further research might show that one of the other models is in fact
more accurate, and we therefore consider their philosophical implications as
well.

Affective competence model
On the affective competence model, people’s responses in the concrete condi-
tions of our original experiment are genuine expressions of their underlying

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 679

competence. The suggestion is that the compatibilist responses people give in
these conditions are not clouded by any kind of performance error. Rather,
these responses reflect a successful implementation of the system we normally
use for making responsibility judgments, and that system should therefore be
regarded as a compatibilist one.

In many ways, this affective competence model is reminiscent of the view
that P.F. Strawson (1962) puts forward in his classic paper ‘Freedom and
Resentment.’ On that view, it would be a mistake to go about trying to
understand the concept of moral responsibility by seeking to associate it
with some sort of metaphysical theory. Rather, the best place to start is with
an examination of the ‘reactive attitudes’ (blame, remorse, gratitude, etc.) and
the role they play in our ordinary practice of responsibility attribution.

Yet, despite the obvious affinities between the affective competence model
and Strawson’s theory, it is important to keep in mind certain respects in
which the affective competence model is making substantially weaker claims.
Most importantly, the model isn’t specifically claiming that people proceed
correctly in the concrete conditions. All it says is that people’s responses in
these conditions reflect a successful implementation of their own underlying
system for making responsibility judgments. This claim then leaves it en-
tirely open whether the criteria used in that underlying system are themselves
correct or incorrect.

For an analogous case, consider the ways in which people ordinarily make
probability judgments. It can be shown that people’s probability judgments
often involve incorrect inferences, and one might therefore be tempted to
assume that people are not correctly applying their own underlying criteria for
probabilistic inference. But many psychologists reject this view. They suggest
that people actually are correctly applying their underlying criteria and that
the mistaken probabilistic inferences only arise because people’s underlying
criteria are themselves faulty (see, e.g., Tversky and Kahneman 1981; 1983).
Clearly, a similar approach could be applied in the case of responsibility
judgments. Even if people’s compatibilist intuitions reflect a successful imple-
mentation of their underlying system for making responsibility judgments,
one could still argue that this underlying system is itself flawed. Hence, the
affective competence model would vindicate the idea that people’s core views
about responsibility are compatibilist, but it would be a mistake to regard
the model as an outright vindication of those intuitions.

Concrete Competence Model
The implications of the concrete competence model depend in a crucial way
on the precise details of the competence involved. Since it is not possible to
say anything very general about all of the models in this basic category, we will
focus specifically on the implications of the claim that people’s responsibility
attributions are subserved by an encapsulated module.

680 NO ˆUS

As a number of authors have noted, modularity involves a kind of trade-
off. The key advantages of modules are that they usually operate automat-
ically, unconsciously, and extremely quickly. But these advantages come at
a price. The reason why modules are able to operate so quickly is that they
simply ignore certain sources of potentially relevant information. Even when
we know that the lines in the M¨uller-Lyer illusion are the same length, we still
have the visual illusion. Perhaps in the assignment of moral responsibility, we
are dealing with a similar sort of phenomenon—a ‘moral illusion.’ It might
be that people have a complex and sophisticated theory about the relationship
between determinism and moral responsibility but that the relevant module
just isn’t able to access this theory. It continues to spit out judgments that the
agent is blameworthy even when these judgments go against a consciously
held theory elsewhere in the mind.

Of course, defenders of compatibilism might point out that this argument
can also be applied in the opposite direction. They might suggest that the
module itself contains a complex and sophisticated theory to which the rest
of the mind has no access. The conclusion would be that, unless we use the
module to assess the relationship between determinism and moral responsi-
bility, we will arrive at an impoverished and inadequate understanding. This
type of argument definitely seems plausible in certain domains (e.g., in the
domain of grammatical theory). It is unclear at this point whether something
analogous holds true for the domain of responsibility attribution.13

Reflective Equilibrium
Our concern in this section has been with philosophical questions about
whether knowledge of particular mental processes are likely to give us valu-
able insight into complex moral issues. Clearly, these philosophical questions
should be carefully distinguished from the purely psychological question as
to whether people think that particular mental processes give them insight
into these issues. Even if people think that a given process is affording them
valuable moral insight, it might turn out that this process is actually entirely
unreliable and they would be better off approaching these issues in a radically
different way.

Still, we thought it would be interesting to know how people themselves
resolve the tension between their rival intuitions, and we therefore ran one
final experiment. All subjects were given a brief description of the results
from our earlier studies and then asked to adjudicate the conflict between the
compatibilist and incompatibilist intuitions. Given that people’s intuitions in
the concrete conditions contradict their intuitions in the abstract conditions,
would they choose to hold on to the concrete judgment that Bill is morally
responsible or the abstract judgment that no one can be responsible in a
deterministic universe?14 The results showed no clear majority on either side.
Approximately half of the subjects chose to hold onto the judgment that

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 681

the particular agent was morally responsible, while the other half chose to
hold onto the judgment that no one can be responsible in a deterministic
universe.15 Apparently, there is no more consensus about these issues among
the folk than there is among philosophers.

9. Conclusion

As we noted at the outset, participants in the debate over moral responsibility
have appealed to an enormous variety of arguments. Theories from meta-
physics, moral philosophy, philosophy of mind and even quantum mechanics
have all been shown to be relevant in one way or another, and researchers are
continually finding new ways in which seemingly unrelated considerations
can be brought to bear on the issue. The present paper has not been con-
cerned with the full scope of this debate. Instead, we have confined ourselves
to just one type of evidence—evidence derived from people’s intuitions.

Philosophers who have discussed lay intuitions in this area tend to say
either that folk intuitions conform to compatibilism or that they conform to
incompatibilism. Our actual findings were considerably more complex and
perhaps more interesting. It appears that people have both compatibilist and
incompatibilist intuitions. Moreover, it appears that these different kinds of
intuitions are generated by different kinds of psychological processes. To as-
sess the importance of this finding for the debate over moral responsibility,
one would have to know precisely what sort of psychological process pro-
duced each type of intuition and how much weight to accord to the output
of each sort of process. We have begun the task of addressing these issues
here, but clearly far more remains to be done.

Acknowledgments

Several people gave us great feedback on an early draft of this paper. We’d like to
thank John Doris, Chris Hitchcock, Bob Kane, Neil Levy, Al Mele, Stephen Morris,
Thomas Nadelhoffer, Eddy Nahmias, Derk Pereboom, Lynne Rudder-Baker, Tamler
Sommers, Jason Turner, and Manuel Vargas. Thanks also to John Fischer for posting a
draft of this paper on the Garden of Forking Paths weblog (http://gfp.typepad.com/).
Versions of this paper were delivered at the UNC/Duke workshop on Naturalized
Ethics, the Society for Empirical Ethics, the Society for Philosophy and Psychology,
Yale University, the University of Arizona, and the Inland Northwest Philosophy
Conference. We thank the participants for their helpful comments.

Notes

1 Actually, compatibilists and incompatibilists argue both (1) about whether determinism
is compatible with moral responsibility and (2) about whether determinism is compatible with
free will. As Fischer (1999) has emphasized, these two questions are logically independent. One
might maintain that determinism is compatible with moral responsibility but not with free will.

682 NO ˆUS

Here, however, our concern lies entirely with the first of the two questions—whether determinism
is compatible with moral responsibility.

2 We use the term ‘theory’ here loosely to refer to an internally represented body of infor-
mation. Also, when we claim that the folk have an incompatibilist theory, we are not suggesting
that this theory has a privileged status over the psychological systems that generate compatibilist
intuitions. As will be apparent, we think that it remains an open question whether the system
that generates incompatibilist intuitions has a privileged status.

3 One virtue of Nahmias and colleagues’ question about moral responsibility is that the
notion of ‘moral responsibility’ is supposed to be common between philosophers and the folk.
That is, philosophers tend to assume that the notion of moral responsibility deployed in phi-
losophy closely tracks the notion that people express when they attribute moral responsibility.
Furthermore, incompatibilists often specify that the relevant incompatibilist notion of free will
is precisely the notion of free will that is required for moral responsibility (e.g., Campbell 1951).
Nahmias and colleagues also ask questions about whether the agent in the deterministic scenario
“acts of his own free will.” and they find that people give answers consonant with compatibilism.
We find these results less compelling. For the expression ‘free will’ has become a term of philo-
sophical art, and it’s unclear how to interpret lay responses concerning such technical terms.
Moreover, incompatibilists typically grant that there are compatibilist notions of freedom that
get exploited by the folk. Incompatibilists just maintain that there is also a commonsense notion
of freedom that is not compatibilist.

4 Although these results from Viney and colleagues are suggestive, the measure used for
identifying determinists is too liberal, and as a result, the group of subjects coded as ‘determinists’
might well include indeterminists. (See McIntyre et al. 1984 for a detailed description of the
measure.) It remains to be seen whether this result will hold up using better measures for
identifying determinists.

5 A related problem for the incompatibilist concerns the history of philosophy—if incom-
patibilism is intuitive, why has compatibilism been so popular among the great philosophers in
history? An incompatibilist-friendly explanation is given in Nichols (2007).

6 In our deterministic scenario, we say that given the past, each decision has to happen the
way that it does. This scenario allows us to test folk intuitions about the type of compatibilism
most popular in contemporary philosophy. Most contemporary compatibilists argue, following
Frankfurt (1969), that an agent can be morally responsible for her behavior even if she had to
act the way she did. (As we shall see, most subjects in our concrete condition give responses
that conform to this view.) However, it would also be possible for a compatibilist to maintain
that (1) we can never be responsible for an event that had to occur the way it did but also that
(2) even if a particular behavior is determined to occur by the laws of nature, the agent does
not necessarily have to perform that behavior. Our experiment does not address the possibility
that the folk subscribe to this type of compatibilism. With any luck, that possibility will be
investigated in future research.

7 It will, of course, be important to investigate whether our results extend to other popula-
tions. However, as we will stress throughout, we are primarily looking at how subjects from the
same population give different answers in the different conditions.

8 χ 2 (1, N = 41) = 6.034, p < .05, two-tailed.
9 We also ran an experiment that used a more real-world kind of case than the deterministic
set up described in our main experiments. This was sparked by some perceptive comments from
Daniel Batson, who also gave us extremely helpful suggestions in designing the study. Again,
the idea was to test whether abstract conditions were more likely to generate incompatibilist
responses than affect-laden concrete conditions. All subjects were told about a genetic condition
that leads a person to perform horrible actions, but they were also told that there is now an
inexpensive pill that counteracts the condition and that now everyone with the condition gets
this pill. In the abstract condition, subjects were then asked to indicate whether the people who
had this condition before the pill was created could be held morally responsible for their actions.
In the concrete condition, subjects were told that Bill had this condition before the pill was
invented, and Bill killed his wife and children to be with his secretary. Subjects were then asked

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 683

to indicate whether Bill was morally responsible for his action. The results were quite clear, and
they were in concert with all of our earlier findings. Subjects given the abstract question gave
significantly lower ratings of responsibility than subjects given the concrete question. Thus, the
basic effect can be obtained using quite different materials.

10 As far as we know, no prior research has posited a moral responsibility module, but there
has been considerable enthusiasm for the more general idea that many basic cognitive capacities
are driven by modules (Fodor 1983; Leslie 1994), and a number of authors have suggested that
certain aspects of moral judgment might be subserved by module-like mechanisms (Dwyer 1999;
Harman 1999; Hauser 2006).

11 We are grateful to Jesse Prinz for suggesting this possibility.
12 As in our previous experiments, the vast majority of subjects said that our universe was
most similar to the indeterminist universe. We suspect that being a determinist might actually
lead people to have more compatibilist views (see Nichols 2006), and as a result, we antecedently
decided to exclude the minority who gave the determinist response from our statistical analyses.
The statistical details are as follows. The contrast between high and low affect for the determinist
condition was significant (χ 2 (1, N = 44) = 8.066, p < .01). That is, people were more likely to
say that it’s possible for the rapist to be fully morally responsible. The contrast between the two
high affect conditions was also significant (χ 2 (1, N = 45) = 7.204, p < .01); that is, people were
more likely to say that it’s possible that the rapist is fully morally responsible in the indeterminist
universe. The contrast between the two low affect conditions was very highly significant (χ 2 (1,
N = 45) = 26.492, p < 0.0001). Subjects were dramatically more likely to say that it’s possible
for the tax cheat to be fully morally responsible in the indeterminist universe.

13 The distinction between modularity hypotheses and affective hypotheses first entered
the philosophical literature in the context of the debate about the role of moral considerations
in intentional action (Knobe 2006, Malle and Nelson 2003, Nadelhoffer 2004; Young et al.
2006). In that context, modularity hypotheses are usually regarded as vindicating folk intuitions.
However, there is a key difference between that context and the present one. The difference is
that information about the moral status of the action might be accessible in an intentional action
module, but information about determinism is unlikely to be accessible in a moral responsibility
module.

14 The design of the pilot study was modeled on the initial experiments described in section
3. Participants were asked both the high affect (Bill stabbing his wife) and the abstract questions
(counterbalanced for order). They then answered the reflective equilibrium question:

Previous research indicates that when people are given question 3 above, they often say that
Bill is fully morally responsible for killing his family. But when people are given question
2 above, most people say that it is not possible that people in Universe A are fully morally
responsible for their actions. Clearly these claims are not consistent. Because if it is not
possible to be fully morally responsible in Universe A, then Bill can’t be fully morally
responsible.

We are interested in how people will resolve this inconsistency. So, regardless of how you
answered questions 2 and 3, please indicate which of the following you agree with most:

i. In Universe A, it is not possible for people to be morally responsible for their actions.

ii. Bill, who is in universe A, is fully morally responsible for killing his family.

15 There were 19 subjects. Of these, 10 gave incompatibilist response to the reflective equi-

librium question; 9 gave compatibilist responses.

684 NO ˆUS

References

Blair, R. 1995. “A Cognitive Developmental Approach to Morality: Investigating the Psy-

chopath.” Cognition 57.

Blair, R., Jones, L., Clark, F., Smith, M., and Jones, L. 1997. “The Psychopathic Individual: A

Lack of Responsiveness to Distress Cues?” Psychophysiology 34.

Campbell, C. A. 1951. “Is ‘Free Will’ a Pseudo-problem?” Journal of Philosophy 60.
Dwyer, S. 1999. “Moral Competence.” In K. Murasugi and R. Stainton (eds.), Philosophy and

Linguistics. Westview Press.

Fischer, J. 1999. “Recent Work on Moral Responsibility.” Ethics 110.
Fodor, J. 1983. Modularity of Mind. MIT Press.
Frankfurt, H. 1969. “Alternate Possibilities and Moral Responsibility.” Journal of Philosophy

66.

Frankfurt, H. 1988. The Importance of What We Care About: Philosophical Essays. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Greene, J., Sommerville, R., Nystrom, L., Darley, J., and Cohen, J. 2001. “An fMRI Investigation

of Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment.” Science 293.

Haidt, J. 2001. “The Emotional Dog and its Rational Tail: A Social Intuitionist Approach to

Moral Judgment.” Psychological Review 108.

Haidt, J., Koller, S.H., Dias, M.G. 1993. “Affect, Culture, and Morality, or Is it Wrong to Eat

Your Dog?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65.

Harman, G. 1999. “Moral Philosophy and Linguistics.” In K. Brinkmann (ed.), Proceedings of
the 20th World Congress of Philosophy: Volume 1: Ethics. Philosophy Documentation
Center.

Hauser, M. 2006. Moral Minds: The Unconscious Voice of Right and Wrong. NY: Harper Collins.
Hauser, M., Young, L., and Cushman, F. forthcoming. “Reviving Rawls’ Linguistic Anal-
ogy: Operative Principles and the Causal Structure of Moral Actions.” In W. Sinnott-
Armstrong (ed.) Moral Psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Hume, D. 1740/1978. A Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kane, R. 1999. “Responsibility, Luck, and Chance: Reflections on Free Will and Indetermin-

ism.” Journal of Philosophy 96.

Knobe, J. 2003a. “Intentional Action and Side-Effects in Ordinary Language.” Analysis 63.
Knobe, J. 2003b. “Intentional Action in Folk Psychology: An Experimental Investigation.”

Philosophical Psychology 16.

Knobe, J. 2006. “The Concept of Intentional Action: A Case Study in the Uses of Folk Psy-

chology.” Philosophical Studies 130.

Kunda, Z. 1990. “The Case for Motivated Reasoning.” Psychological Bulletin 108.
Lerner, J., Goldberg, J., and Tetlock, P. 1998. “Sober Second Thought: The Effects of Account-
ability, Anger, and Authoritarianism on Attributions of Responsibility.” Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin 24.

Leslie, A. 1994. “ToMM, ToBY and Agency: Core Architecture and Domain Specificity.” In L.
Hirschfeld and S. Gelman (eds.) Mapping the mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Malle, B. and Nelson, S. 2003. “Judging Mens Rea: The Tension Between Folk Concepts and

Legal Concepts of Intentionality.” Behavioral Sciences and the Law 21.

McIntyre, R., Viney, D., and Viney, W. 1984. “Validity of a scale designed to measure beliefs in

free will and determinism” Psychological Reports 54.

Nadelhoffer, T. 2004. “Praise, Side Effects, and Folk Ascriptions of Intentional Action.” The

Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology 24.

Nahmias, E., Morris, S., Nadelhoffer, T., and Turner, J. 2005. “Surveying Freedom: Folk Intu-

itions about Free Will and Moral Responsibility.” Philosophical Psychology 18.

Nichols, S. 2002. “Norms with Feeling.” Cognition 84.
Nichols, S. 2004a. “The Folk Psychology of Free Will: Fits and Starts.” Mind & Language 19.

Moral Responsibility and Determinism 685

Nichols, S. 2004b. Sentimental Rules: On the Natural Foundations of Moral Judgment. Oxford

University Press.

Nichols, S. 2006. “Folk Intuitions about Free Will.” Journal of Cognition and Culture.
Nichols, S. 2007. “The Rise of Compatibilism: A Case Study in the Quantitative History of

Philosophy.” Midwest Studies 31.

Prinz, J. 2007. The Emotional Construction of Morals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. 1999. “Is Vision Continuous with Cognition? The Case for Cognitive Impenetra-

bility of Visual Perception.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22.

Smart, D., and Loewenstein, G. forthcoming. “The Devil You Know: The Effects of Identifia-

bility on Punitiveness.” Journal of Behavional Deecision Making.
Strawson, G. 1986. Freedom and Belief . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Strawson, P. 1962. “Freedom and Resentment.” Proceedings of the British Academy 48. Reprinted
in G. Watson (ed.) Free Will, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980. Page references
are to the reprinted version.

Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. 1981. “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of

Choice.” Science 211.

Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. 1983. “Extensional versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction

Fallacy in Probablistic Reasoning.” Psychological Review 90.

Van Inwagen, P. 1983. An Essay on Free Will. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vargas, M. 2006. “On the Importance of History for Responsible Agency.” Philosophical Studies

127.

Viney, W., Waldman, D., and Barchilon, J. 1982. “Attitudes toward Punishment in Relation to

Beliefs in Free Will and Determinism.” Human Relations 35.

Viney, W., Parker-Martin, P., and Dotten, S. D.H. 1988. “Beliefs in Free Will and Determinism
and Lack of Relation to Punishment Rationale and Magnitude.” Journal of General
Psychology 115.

Watson, G. 1987. “Responsibility and the Limits of Evil: Variations on a Strawsonian Theme.”
in Responsibility, Character, and the Emotions: New Essays in Moral Psychology, ed. F.
Schoeman, Cambridge University Press.

Weinberg, J., Nichols, S., and Stich, S. 2001. “Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions.” Philo-

sophical Topics 29.

Woolfolk, R., Doris, J., and Darley, J. 2006. “Identification, Situational Constraint, and Social

Cognition.” Cognition 100.

Young, L., Cushman, F., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., and Hauser, M. 2006. “Does Emotion Mediate
the Effect of an Action’s Moral Status on its Intentional Status? Neuropsychological
Evidence.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 6.

