Behavioural Tracking 

presentation by
 Quynh Nguyen & Sara Eustergerling

18.11.2014
Philosophical aspects of privacy & computer-aided surveillance
Dr. Uwe Meyer

 

 

Outline

1. Behavioural tracking and targeting 

● general information
● who does it?
● tracking, targeting and consent
● profiling

2. Phorm – an introduction

● functional principle
● (legal) issues  

3. Phorm – rise and fall
4. Regulation of behavioural tracking

● USA
● Europe
● ways forward and rights-based solutions 

 

 

Behavioural tracking and targeting 

● Tracking: the monitoring of what a user is doing on the web

● Targeting: using the infomation won by tracking to send 

tailored advertisement and content 

Important distinction between both processes:
e.g. „Do Not Track“ initiative

 

 

Who does it?

● Google (AdSense), Yahoo!, AOL, Microsoft, etc

● Mark Wilmot in Marketing Daily 2009:

“Something amazing happens when marketing efforts are actually 
relevant to people. We see this step as initiating that crucial dialogue. 
And shoppers, for their part, are replying, essentially giving permission 
to marketers to learn their habits and respond accordingly.“ 

 

 

Tracking, targeting and consent

● Both sides must benefit and must understand this benefit, and 

consent to the process

● Collaborate consent (see chapter 2)

Two key aspects: 

● Treats consent not as a discrete, on-off decision, but as a 

process 

● Looks at consent as a two-way process – a dialogue

 → not only apt but only kind that is appropriate 

 

 

Isn't it just about advertising?

There are several issues: 

●  “piggybacking“ on commercial efforts by governments and 

criminals alike 

● advertising will get much more successful and persuasive (e.g. 

profiling, “pay-per-click“-basis)
  

 

 

Profiling 

 
1. Profiling is a statistical effort 
2. The bigger the database, the more accurate the profiling 
3. The bigger databases, the more powerful must the computer 
systems be
 → much more accurate than “human expert“ profiling 

e.g. Apple's iTunes Genius  

 

 

Imperfect profiling

● Despite the power of statistics profiling is still not 100% 

accurate, there are still problems with 

● imperfect identification, e.g. “surprise-advertising“ 
● counter-criminal activities 

● Regarding advertisement, imperfect profiling is not quite as 

significant

 

 

Predictive profiling

● Profiling used to predict and control peoples' behaviour 
● “Offline example“: 

Harrah's casinos (assessing the “pain point“) 

 

→

 legal basis? 

 → All this shows: it's not “just“ about advertising 

 

 

Phorm 

● Phorm is a digital technology company known for its contextual 

advertising software

● Toeing the line between adware und spyware

 

● Phorm's Webwise: behavioural tracking and targeting service, and 

“a personalised internet“

● Webwise works in three phases:

1. monitoring, tracking
2. analysis 
3. targeting 

Phase 1: monitoring and tracking

● Monitoring works by intercepting the user's instructions at ISP 

level and filtering out the information that could be relevant

● Involves putting a “false“ cookie onto the user's computer by 

masquerading as the website the user wants to visit   

● That cookie contains an individual, anonymous identifier (UID) 

used to monitor the user 

Phase 1: monitoring and tracking

Since Phorm uses these UIDs they claim that the user will stay 
anonymous. However, there are several loopholes during the 
monitoring phase:
 

● if the visited website uses HTTPS protocol for secure 

browsing 

→

 webmaster can read the UID using Javascript

● if the link between user and tracked information is “made in 

the real world, not in the world of bits“ 

→

 shoulder-surfing

Phase 2: Analysis 

● The analysis works similiar to the one done by search engines

  

● Builts up the the profile of the user

 

● After analysis of a page, the profile is packed into a short record 
(containing e.g. top ten words which characterize the page and 
the UID) 

Phase 3: Targeting

● different “channels“ (profiles) set up by Phorm with which the 

short record is compared to 

● when it fits into one of the channels, the UID becomes eligible for 

an advertisement from that channel

● a time-stamped record consisting of the name of the channel and 

the UID is made; the earlier record is deleted

● when a user visits a website, the previously chosen 

advertisement from that channel will appear 

(Legal) issues

Legal issues:
2008: legal analysis of Phorm by the Foundation for Information 
Policy Research found these problems: 

1. interception of communications (contrary to RIPA)
2. fraud
3. risk of committing civil wrongs 
4. unlawful processing of sensible personal data (contrary to 
DPA)

Other issues: 

● Phorm works on a “global“ scale
● Only Phorm (and their clients) benefit from Webwise 

 

 

Regulations of behavioural tracking & targeting 

Phorm put attention on the whole ordeal of behavioural tracking 
and targeting 

In the EU this led to the Cookie Directive:

The Cookie Law “is a piece of privacy legislation that requires 
websites to get consent from visitors to store or retrieve any 
information on a computer, smartphone or tablet.“

 

 

Regulations of behavioural tracking & targeting 

In the USA: Do Not Track initiative
DNT is a technology and policy proposal that enables users to opt out of 
tracking by websites
Issues: 
1. DNT-options are opt-out and not opt-in
2. interpretation of “do not track“ as “do not target“
3. only a short-term fix as there are always new ways of behavioural tracking
    developing

 → There are real gaps between what the industry wants, what the lawmaker 
are proposing, and what might actually be useful to users 

 

       

 

Rights-based solutions

Bernal's suggestions: 

● A right to monitor the monitors 

● Collaborative consent to behavioural tracking 

● Future for behavioural tracking 

 

 

Monitor the monitors

● one key question: would monitoring of a person's internet 

activities be acceptable even if it would be compliant with data 
protection legislation? 
 → shows one of the mayor problems of data protection: it 
focuses on data instead of privacy

● it should be a right not to be monitored 
● Even more: if we are monitored, we should be allowed to 

monitor the monitors and to control how and when monitoring 
takes place

 

 

Collaborative consent to behavioural tracking 

“If a way can be found for the individuals concerned to have a real, 
autonomous and consensual choice as to whether and how to 
participate in programmes like these, all sides could benefit.“ 
 → collaborative consent
Consent: “a two-way, continuous and interactive process“

 both monitor tracking cookies and allow the user to decide 

Implementation attempts: Ghostery, DoNotTrackMe 
→
which ones may or may not track them 
 

 

Future for behavioural tracking

Bernal's suggestions: 

● Profiling service where users volunteer to be profiled for premium 

services 

● Reshaping of the internet

Do you have any suggestions?

 

 

Discussion launchers

● Do you have any questions or remarks?
● We talked about predictive and imperfect profiling. How could you 
imagine these techniques evolving in the future (e.g. in regards to 
governments)?

● Regarding the Harrah's casino example: how can predictive profiling 

and manipulation disturb a person's autonomy? 

● Would you even call that loss of freedom of will? Or loss of freedom 

of action? 

● The Phorm case showed the power of the users and advocacy groups

—do you think this could be possible on an even larger scale? 

 

 

Thank you for your attention!

 

 

Bibliography

● Internet Privacy Rights, chapter 6 – P. Bernal (2014)
●  http://www.spychecker.com/spyware.html
● http://www.cookielaw.org/the-cookie-law/
● http://vesterncasino.blogspot.de/2011/10/harrahs-casino-online.html
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vMT7ylFHVEo&list=UUSLfVGSrDlFqQgRNjn_Qs

gA

● http://www.theregister.co.uk/2009/03/11/phorm_berners_lee_westminster/
● https://www.privacyinternational.org/resources/privacy-101
● https://www.openrightsgroup.org/campaigns/stop-phorm
● https://cdt.org/
● http://paulbernal.wordpress.com/2012/01/28/phorm-a-chapter-closes/

 

 

