 

 

 

 

 

A COҭCEPTUAL DISCUSSIOҭ Oҭ FORCED MIGRATIOҭ: 

A CASE STUDY Oҭ DISPLACEMEҭT OF KURDS Iҭ TURKEY DURIҭG 1990s 

 

 

 

 

Master Thesis in the Master Program 

 International Migration and Intercultural Relations (IMIB):  
Erasmus Mundus Master in International Migration and Social 

Cohesion (MISOCO) at the University of Osnabrück 

 

 

by 

Mert Peksen 

 

Supervisors: 

Prof. Dr. Andreas Pott (University of Osnabrück) 

Assist. Prof. Dr. Sébastien Chauvin (University of Amsterdam) 

Prof. Dr. Eduardo J. Ruiz Vieytez (University of Deusto) 

 

 

 

 

Date of Submission: 02 May 2012 

 

ABSTRACT 

This  study  proposes  that  the  existing  policy-making  categories  of  forced  migration  fail  to 

encompass  the  unique  displacement  experiences  of  individuals,  and  thus  fail  to  fulfill  their 

particular needs. In the first part of the study, in order to construct a theoretical framework, I 

juxtapose what I see as two different groups of forced migration literature. In the second part, 

using the data collected during my fieldwork in Turkey, I illustrate the importance that factors 

other than push factors have in forced migration, thus suggesting that forced migrants are not 

only passive victims, but active people who consciously use their social networks and various 

types of capitals in order to influence their migration.  In the final part,  I argue  for  a critical 

approach to  forced migration research, that  would be open for  authentic  voices of migrants, 

and that would create more flexible, analytic categories of forced migration.  

Table of Contents 

1. 

INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 1 

1.1.  Working Hypotheses ............................................................................................... 2 

1.2.  Organization of the Study ....................................................................................... 3 

1.3.  Methodology of the Study ....................................................................................... 4 

2.  BRIEF HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF DISPLACEMENT OF KURDS IN 

TURKEY ............................................................................................................................. 11 

3.  CONCEPTUAL DEBATE ON FORCED MIGRATION ........................................... 16 

3.1.  Conventional Forced Migration Narrative ............................................................ 16 

3.2.  Forced Migration as a Policy Making Category and a Label ................................ 24 

3.3.  Critical Approach to Forced Migration Literature ................................................ 28 

4.  ANALYSIS OF ETHNOGRAPHIC DATA ................................................................ 32 

4.1.  Complexity of Push Factors in Displacement ....................................................... 33 

4.2.  Factors that Influenced Flight and Exile Stages .................................................... 38 

4.2.1.  Ties with Destination Places and the Role of Existing Migration Regime ... 39 

4.2.2.  Economic Capital ........................................................................................... 43 

4.2.3.  Capability to Activate Connections ............................................................... 45 

4.2.4. 

Social Capital as a Transferable Asset: Nuri’s Story ..................................... 46 

4.2.5.  Economic Strategies of Displaced People and Political Economy of 

Displacement ................................................................................................................ 49 

4.3.  Post-migration Situation ........................................................................................ 52 

4.4.  Shifting Between Categories: Selim’s story ......................................................... 56 

5.  CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................ 65 

REFERENCES .................................................................................................................... 71 

 

 

 

 

1. 

IҭTRODUCTIOҭ 

 

In recent years, forced migration has become one of the major themes of migration 

research and policy-sphere. The rising number of internally and internationally displaced 

people all over the world1 has not only raised the concern for producing more 

comprehensive policies, but it has also increased the need for understanding inner 

dynamics of displacement and its effects on the societies. 

 

Displacement has been researched from several perspectives and as a part of 

different policy agendas. While much of the analysis has focused on the causes of 

displacement, another stream of research has tried to develop policy-making instruments 

(e.g., legal categories) for its managing. On the other hand, some scholars have been more 

concerned with the concept itself and have challenged the way displacement is categorized 

and understood. 

 

Although the amount of literature on forced migration has grown significantly, the 

answers to the questions “What is forced migration?” and “Who is a forced migrant?” 

remain open and subject to a lively debate. In this respect, this study aims to contribute to 

the theoretical debate in the forced migration literature by looking at two aspects: (1) the 

way forced migrants are defined and categorized, and (2) various factors that are analyzed 

in the displacement cases. 

 

This study is aiming to respond to the following research questions: 

(1) What are the main criteria according to which a migrant can be treated as a 

“forced migrant”? To which extent are the policy-making categories able to capture the 

inner dynamics of displacement and unique displacement experiences of migrants? For the 

                                                 
1 Currently there are millions of people who had to leave their hometowns due to different reasons. Number 
of displaced people has been rising tremendously. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR), currently there are almost 10.5 million of refugees (UNHCR, 2010); according to the 
Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) there are at the time around 26 million of internally 
displaced people around the world (IDMC, 2011). In total, including other concerned population, (e.g. people 
with refugee-like situations), according to the UNHCR “an estimated 43.3 million people worldwide were 
forcibly displaced due to conflict and persecution” (2010). 

1 

 

analysis of forced migration, what kind of approach could be an alternative to policy- 

making categorization? 

(2) In addition to the decisive role of the push factors (e.g., armed conflicts), would it 

be possible to argue that pull factors exist for forced migrants? Which factors should be 

taken into account in our analysis of migrants’ decision making processes, their choice of 

destination, search for jobs and housing, and their economic survival in post-migration 

phase? 

(3) As it is impossible to construct a forced migration category that is valid in every 

context, what would be an alternative formulation of the category which could reflect on 

different factors?  

 

1.1.  Working Hypotheses 

 

 

This study is based on two main working hypotheses: 

(1) The existing policy-making categories used to describe forced migration fail to 

explain all the diverse individual experiences of displacement. Categories as such 

inevitably generalize and objectify the conditions and needs of displaced people. 

Therefore, there is a need for another approach to forced migration which is more 

interdisciplinary (primarily based on the theories of sociology, political science, 

anthropology and economics) and analytical. 

 

(2) Although displaced people may have more limited options than other migrants, 

they still actively try to change the conditions around them and the factors that influence 

their migration processes. Therefore, displacement should be analyzed as “a lived 

experience” within a complex political and socio-economic context. Instead of analyzing 

 

2 

displacement only by considering the “push factors”2 and only as a humanitarian subject of 

international organizations, several other factors into the analysis should also be included, 

such as migrants’ networks, capitals they possess, their ability to activate them and to 

transfer one capital to another one, structural restrictions and facilitators, role of external 

actors. Of great importance will be also the questions as to how migrants perceive their 

own situation and what language and concepts they use when talking about their 

displacement experiences. 

 

1.2.  Organization of the Study 

 

This study has five chapters. In the Introduction, the main framework, research 

questions, and working hypotheses are explained. Details of the fieldwork (access to the 

field, sample selection, the design of the interviews, limitations and problems encountered 

during the fieldwork), of the data collection and literature review processes are provided. 

This will be followed, in the second chapter, by a brief historical background of 

displacement in Turkey, in order to construct a framework for the fourth and fifth chapters 

of the study, in which the displacement of Kurdish people will be analyzed in detail. 

 

The third chapter is dedicated to the conceptual discussion on forced migration and 

displacement. I suggest that the literature on forced migration can be divided into two main 

groups on the basis of certain criteria, such as their understanding of the causes of 

displacement, recognition of the active role of displaced people in their migration, and the 

way in which the displaced people are perceived and categorized. The first and second 

sections of this chapter aim to analyze the first group of literature or the “conventional 

forced migration narrative”. It aims to explore the links between the narrative, policy 

making and legal labeling. The third section will present the second group of literature, 
                                                 
2 Following Sonia McKay’s suggestion, in this study the concepts of ‘push’ and ‘pull’ are used “only in their 
most general sense and are not intended to convey the notion that migration can be [simply] categorized as 
into ‘pull’ and ‘push’” (2009, p. 22). 

3 

 

which constitutes another approach to forced migration. I suggest calling it “critical 

approach to forced migration literature”. These two theoretical parts are presented as two 

dialogical sections. While conventional forced migration narrative’s main features are 

presented, critical responses and arguments will also be included into the analysis. Third 

section of the chapter aims to sum up the main arguments of the critical approach to forced 

migration that have not been elaborated in the previous sections. 

 

In the fourth chapter of the study, I will present the ethnographic data gathered 

during the interviews in Turkey. My aim during interviews was to explore different aspects 

of displacement by asking the respondents questions ranging from why they had left their 

villages, how complex the decision making processes were, to how they were able to make 

their living in the cities. The purpose of this chapter is to show migrants´ perspectives on 

their own ventures and to reveal the complex plurality of factors that were at play in each 

case of migration. In the last section of the fourth chapter one particular story of 

displacement will be analyzed in detail. This section shows how variously one single case 

of displacement has been classified on different levels (legal, political and moral/social), 

depending on the context, by different actors.  

 

Finally in the Conclusion, in addition to recapitulating the main findings of the 

study I also wish to propose some ideas for further research related to the theme. 

 

1.3.  Methodology of the Study 

 

A conceptual debate suggested by this study will be based not only on the 

theoretical sources but also, importantly, on ethnographic data from the field. The main 

purpose of conducting a field research is to be able to observe how different theoretical 

models correspond with the “real life”.  

 

4 

 

The process of data collection and literature review for this study underwent four 

stages. At the preliminary stage, in order to be able to locate the research project within the 

existing literature and to construct the main research questions and working hypotheses, I 

have reviewed different sources on forced migration. Literature on forced migration is still 

largely based on refugee issues. However, in the last three decades, especially after the end 

of the Cold War, academic interest in internally displaced persons has significantly 

increased. Despite the particular differences and priorities, literature on refugee issues and 

on internal displacement has been treated here as one group. Looking from a sociological 

perspective, apart from the literature on the legal framework and protection of refugees and 

IDPs, I argue that there are no essential differences between international and internal 

displacement. In some cases the boundaries between these concepts are especially blurred; 

such are, for example, movements of refugees between co-ethnic countries, or an internal 

displacement of people to another part of the country where the language and norms are 

completely different than their hometowns. During this study, I use the word “forced 

migrant” and “displaced people” interchangeably and, if not stated otherwise, not as a legal 

label, whereas I use the term “IDP” to refer to a legal status.  

 

Second stage of the data collection and literature review was largely focused on 

understanding the local dynamics of the case country, Turkey. Various sources on the main 

patterns of internal migration and displacement, the internal migration regime and the 

history of internal displacement in Turkey were reviewed. Furthermore, literature on the 

history of the conflict between the Turkish army and Kurdish armed groups and general 

literature on the “Kurdish question” was also consulted.  

 

At the third stage of data collection, in February and March 2012, a field research 

in two cities in Turkey, Istanbul and Tekirdağ, was carried out. I made fourteen face-to-

face semi-structured interviews. The information I had been gathering during the previous 

 

5 

two stages of literature review helped me to formulate and construct the interview themes, 

questions and the main framework of the ethnographic research; moreover, the knowledge 

on “Kurdish question”, the recent political developments in Turkey, and –despite its 

limitations– on Kurdish culture, has eased the communication with the respondents. 

 

After the fieldwork some of the research questions needed to be revised. 

Observations and fieldwork findings also required a (re-)review of literature. At the fourth 

stage of the data collection and literature review, I returned to the sources I had already 

consulted, as well as looked for new sources related to the research findings, with an 

emphasis on such topics as theories of social networks, agency-structure relations and the 

role of different capitals in migration. 

 

Research Sample 

 

For the sample for the ethnographic research I searched for people with different 

socio-economic backgrounds and different displacement experiences. My respondents 

were eleven people displaced in the first half of the 90s, as well as three internal migrants 

who had left their villages before the armed conflict started in 1984 and had been later 

providing the newcomers and other displaced people with support and assistance.  

 

Two interviewees are official members of the pro-Kurdish Barış ve Demokrasi 

Partisi (Peace and Democracy Party, hereafter BDP) taking an active part in activities of 

the local branch of the party. Interviews with them gave me an opportunity to observe the 

role of the party in displaced people’s adaptation into the new places and construction of 

social and political identities in the cities. 

 

Five of the respondents are affiliated with two different NGOs. They work at the 

NGO offices regularly (at least two days a week) and actively participate in NGO 

activities. One of the NGOs is the Istanbul branch of the Göç-Der (Migrants’ Association 

 

6 

for Solidarity and Culture) which has been provided displaced people with assistance and 

which also published several reports on the dynamics of internal displacement in Turkey 

and socio-economic conditions of migrants after and before their migration. The other 

NGO has been established with the purpose of helping people to find their relatives and 

family members who have disappeared or were kidnapped. Although both of the NGOs 

were founded after the main wave of displaced persons to big cities during 1990s, they 

successfully function at present as a place of consultation, solidarity and socialization of 

displaced people.  

 

Three of my respondents or their families own their textile workshops. I observed 

that almost all family members, including sisters-in-law or young daughters and sons, are 

working in family workshops.  

 

The rest of my respondents have been doing different jobs at construction sites, 

textile and leather workshops or as wage laborers. Some of them had been working as 

street vendors in Istanbul. 

 

Access to the Field 

 

During my fieldwork in Istanbul I have tried using multiple channels in order to 

reach displaced people. I contacted researchers who have already been conducting 

interviews with displaced people in Turkey, as well as several NGOs from Istanbul. I also 

contacted a labor union representative who provided me with an access to three Kurdish 

respondents in Tekirdağ. 

 

The rest of the respondents I found largely through one of the NGOs, Göç-Der, 

which gave me an invaluable support and immense help in finding respondents (e.g., four 

of the interviews were conducted at their office). Thus, personal contacts and snowball 

sampling were the main methods used to reach respondents during the fieldwork research. 

 

7 

Snowballing method was especially important in the second part of the fieldwork, in 

Zeytinburnu neighborhood of Istanbul. 

 

Design of the Interviews 

 

Interviews were semi-structured and organized around six main themes: (1) general 

personal information, (2) mobility timeline of individuals and household members, (3) 

investigation into the reasons for migrating and choice of destination, (4) economic activity 

before and after migration, (5) access to housing, job and social benefits, and finally (6) the 

role of other actors and organizations (e.g. state, political parties and NGOs) in assisting 

the migrants.  

 

Out of fourteen interviews, nine were recorded using a digital voice recorder. Five 

interviews which were conducted in an open setting, on the street or in a café, could not be 

recorded, because the conditions during the interviews were not suitable. It is interesting to 

note that in several interviews people shared relatively sensitive stories only after the 

recorder has been switched off, signalizing that talking to a stranger while their voice is 

being recorded was an uncomfortable experience for them. Information from the not-

recorded interviews used in this study will be clearly marked as such: (Name, personal 

communication, off-the-record, Date of the Interview). 

 

For each interview content protocols were prepared and the important parts of 

interviews were transcribed and included in protocols. Data analysis is based on both the 

content protocol and personal observations during fieldwork. Pseudonyms have been used 

throughout this research to preserve the anonymity of people. 

 

 

 

 

8 

Limitations of the Fieldwork  

 

Before starting fieldwork I was worried about my incompetence in Kurdish 

language as a possible limitation in communication with the respondents. However, I did 

not experience any major difficulties, as I interviewed mostly men and almost all of them 

had very good command of Turkish. It is important to note that there are very strong 

gender differences among Kurdish displaced people when it comes to level of command of 

Turkish. Since Kurdish men have more contact with Turks and the Turkish language 

through working, as well as during fifteen months compulsory military service, they have 

significantly better knowledge in Turkish. Thus, only two of the respondents (one is a 

relatively old man and other one was an old woman) could not speak Turkish and on those 

two occasions a translator was needed. 

 

Armed conflict has affected people’s lives differently. Some of the Kurdish people 

have experienced worse conditions of displacement, some returned, some migrated to 

several other places, even to other countries; some people joined pro-government village 

guards so they did not have to leave their places. When using snowball sampling one 

should be aware of the fact that the respondents in question are likely to share similar 

opinions and have similar experiences. Thus the ethnographic research so created risks 

being biased or representing only one part of the reality. This study has no claim of being 

representative of the situation of whole of the displaced people in Turkey nor is it a 

descriptive study on the general patterns of displacement in Turkey. My aim was instead to 

use the empirical data from the field to show how diverse displacement experiences can be 

and what diverse factors are involved in the process of migration. 

 

With some of my respondents it was difficult to build a trust relationship in a short 

time or to use the same “language”. Sometimes their answers were rather superficial and 

sometimes they meant something else from what they were saying. For instance, one of 

 

9 

them said “there was pressure on me”. I asked what he meant with the word “pressure”. He 

answered, “You know, the general pressure” and did not want to elaborate it more. 

Moreover, in some interviews I was not able to ask relatively sensitive questions 

concerning respondents´ families, affiliation with Kurdish groups and their political 

positions. Due to the limited amount of time available for the fieldwork, it was not possible 

to make more interviews with the same people or spend some more time with them, which 

would have been very helpful for having a better insight into the field.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 

2. 

BRIEF HISTORICAL BACKGROUҭD OF DISPLACEMEҭT 

OF KURDS Iҭ TURKEY 

 

 

In August 1984, Partiya Karkerên Kurdistan (Kurdistan Workers’ Party, hereafter 

PKK) launched its first attack against Turkish armed forces in Siirt, a southeastern 

province of Turkey. It was the beginning3 of what was to become an ongoing armed 

conflict between Kurdish armed groups and the Turkish army (Ballance, 1996, p. 154). 

Between the years 1989 and 1999, when armed conflict, violence and insecurity in the 

Southeastern regions of Turkey reached its peak point, a great number of villages were 

evacuated and thousands of people were displaced (Barut, 2001, p. 8). 

 

 

Map.1. Internal displacement in Turkey (IDMC Webpage: http://www.internal-
displacement.org/8025708F004BE3B1/%28httpInfoFiles%29/2997AAFC50626566C12571800053D66B/$fil
e/Displacement-Turkey-green-s.jpg) 

                                                 
3 Armed conflicts between the Turkish state and the Kurds have not been new phenomena. For a historical 
overview of the relations and conflicts between Kurds and Turks during the Ottoman Empire period and in 
the Turkish Republic, see McDowall, 2004 (chap. 3-4, 9 and 19-20). 

11 

 

 

 

During 1990s, according to the official statistics, almost 3.500 villages and hamlets 

in the southeast were abandoned (T.B.M.M Tutanak Dergisi, 1998). As part of the strategy 

undertaken by Turkish state in order to root out support for the PKK, houses and arable 

areas were damaged and burned, forcing a great number of people to leave their villages. 

In addition to the conflict, threats from the PKK and village guards, general insecurity and 

conflict-caused economic depression have also contributed to the ongoing migration waves 

in the region.  

 

In July 1987, the Turkish Grand National Assembly enacted the Olanağanüstü Hal 

(State of Emergency Legislation, hereafter OHAL)4 establishing a state of emergency 

regime in eight provinces. Area of OHAL was later expanded to cover thirteen provinces 

in south and southeastern Turkey (IDMC, 2009, p. 18). OHAL regime in the region has not 

only increased the pressure on the local population by giving military officials great power 

which could hardly be controlled by the central authority, but it also increased the number 

of extra-judicial killings, disappearances and unsolved murders. All these factors have 

contributed to the rising general insecurity in the region.  

 

In addition to the OHAL regime, in 1985 Turkish state also introduced Village 

Guards System (in Turkish: Koruculuk), a paramilitary strategy, to fight against the PKK. 

The main purpose of this system has been to employ and arm people from local population 

who are familiar with the territory, speak Kurdish, and can follow local developments and 

provide intelligence to the state. Today, according to estimations, there are around 57.000 

village guards employed by the state and 12.000 volunteer village guards in the region 

(IDMC, 2009, p. 9). Extra-judicial activities of the village guards, as well as military 

pressure on people who refused to join the village guards system, are ranking significantly 

                                                 
4 OHAL regime in the southeastern provinces was lifted in 2002 (IDMC, 2009, p. 17) 

 

12 

high among the reasons for local population to leave their villages, and were pointed out 

several times by respondents in this study. 

 

Figures 

 

Estimates of the number of people who had to leave their villages have been 

repeatedly contested. They range from 350.000 to four million people. The numbers 

depend largely on who is counting and what the criteria used to classify people as forced 

migrants are. Therefore, there are big differences and contradictions between estimations 

made by different actors. According to an official parliament commission report from 

1998, the number of displaced persons was 378.335, while 3.165 villages and hamlets were 

abandoned (T.B.M.M. Tutanak Dergisi, 1998). This number was contested by several 

parties. Many of the villages which were emptied were not at all enlisted by the 

commission; for example, Tunceli MP Orhan Yildirim stated that although his hometown 

was also evacuated by the soldiers, it has not appeared on the commission report list 

(USCR, 1999, p. 6). 

There are a number of reasons why certain cases of displacement do not count in 

the official statistics. For example, some of my respondents told that they did not 

accept to join the pro-government village guards and that due to the pressure from 

the military they had to leave their villages, although there were no official orders 

of evacuation of their places. According to a Göç-Der representative, such cases of 

displacement are included in their number estimations, whereas the state does not 

consider them, since displacement in these cases did not occur as a result of an 

official order of evacuation (Halil, personal communication, off-the-record, 

February 25, 2012). 

 

13 

In 2006, the Turkish government commissioned the Institute of Population Studies, 

Hacettepe University to prepare a study of internal displacement and living conditions of 

displaced people. According to the report, in the twenty year period (1985-2005), it is 

estimated that between 946.400 and 1.201.200 people had to leave their homes due to the 

armed conflict (HÜNEE, 2006). Other institutions and NGOs make an even broader 

definition of internal displacement, estimating the number of displaced people to be 

between two and four million. For example, Human Rights Association declares that 3688 

settlements were evacuated and 2,3 million people displaced (Perinçek, n.d.). NGO Göç-

Der makes a higher estimation of around 4 million (2011) A representative of the Göç-Der 

explains the reason why there is a huge difference between their estimation and Hacettepe 

University’s and the state’s estimations:  

They only count people whose villages were demolished by the army or PKK. 

There are many empty villages, like ghost villages, in which you can live now, 

houses have all stuff inside. But people are afraid of going back. Those villages 

were not attacked by any of the sides. But people left due to insecurity and 

pressure. Another thing is that migration has affected many people’s lives, not only 

of those who migrated, but also of those who were born in the big cities and had to 

migrate again and again (Halil, personal communication, off-the-record, February 

25, 2012). 

What do all these contradictions between the numbers tell us? First of all, depending on its 

political position, each institution uses different criteria to frame what would fit into the 

definition of “forced”. Thus, this concept undergoes a process of re-definition by different 

actors. Numbers vary because internal displacement is a politically loaded issue. It could 

hardly be separated from its political meaning in a certain context.  

 

14 

 

In Turkey, there have been different responses to displacement coming from the 

political sphere, ranging from ignoring the existence of displacement to a “conditional” 

acceptance. For instance, the ex-prime minister of Turkey, Tansu Çiller, denied the 

existence of village evacuations by the Turkish military, stating that “Even if I saw with 

my own eyes that the state had burned a village, I would not believe it. Do not think that 

every helicopter you see is ours.” (Cumhuriyet, October 28, 1994). Another member of 

parliament from the same party similarly declared that internal migration was not caused 

by village evacuations, but through pressure from the PKK and out of economic reasons. 

He said that “Thirty-five percent of the migration in the region is due to economic reasons; 

60 percent of it is because of the oppression by the separatist organization; and the 

remaining 5 percent is due to the compulsory applications of the provincial administration” 

(USCR, 1999, p. 13) 

 

Secondly, every attempt to count people and to define them as displaced/forced will 

inevitably re-create/re-frame the category. Not only making estimations, but also policy-

making, problem solving and conflict resolution require “making a category” and putting 

some people under that category and leaving some others aside. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15 

3. 

COҭCEPTUAL DEBATE Oҭ FORCED MIGRATIOҭ  

 

 

For the purposes of this study, I suggest analyzing the literature on forced migration 

under two main titles. First group of literature would thus be what Sorensen calls the 

“conventional forced migration narrative” (Sorensen, 1997, p. 145), whereas the second 

group would consist of “critical approaches” to forced migration research. In order to 

create a framework for the analysis and to show what it is that the critical approach 

responds and contributes to, I would like to begin with the exploration of the conventional 

narrative. 

 

3.1.  Conventional Forced Migration ҭarrative 

 

This part is dedicated to the detailed analysis of three main premises of the 

conventional forced migration narrative, that can be summed up as follows: (1) Push 

factors that compel people to leave their homes are the main determinants of their mobility, 

and by looking at the “essential” motivations of migrants and analyzing the role of push 

factors, it would be possible to make a distinction between voluntary and involuntary 

migration; (2) common stages of forced migration can be identified; (3) forced migration is 

usually an outcome of sudden and unexpected emergencies, therefore displaced people are 

generally caught without preparation, which makes them vulnerable in the further course 

of events. 

 

Push Factors and Categories of Migration 

 

I would like to start the analysis of the conventional narrative by addressing the first 

above named assumption, the one related to the categorization of human mobility and the 

decisive role of the push factors in involuntary migration. Based on the motivations of 

 

16 

individuals or on the conditions existing in sending and receiving places, migration is 

divided into two main groups:5 involuntary and voluntary movements (Van Hear, 1998, p. 

10; Oliver-Smith, 1991). Involuntary movements are caused by strong push factors that 

leave migrants with no choices other than leaving their places immediately. 6  In contrast, 

in voluntary type of migration, conditions that are offered in destination places play a 

particularly important role in attracting migrants. Moreover, voluntary migrants are seen as 

well-informed social agents who are prepared to move to another place and make cost-

benefit calculations of their decisions.7 

 

In contrast to voluntary migrants, who have different motivations to migrate, forced 

migrants move from their settlement against their will. Forced migrants, as a “distinct 

social type” (Kunz, 1973, p. 130) and with “an imposed crisis-based identity” (Zetter, 

1991, p. 60) are perceived as victims of unexpected events and as a group of people which 

has “unique needs and heightened vulnerabilities” (Mooney, 2005, p. 18). Forced migrants 

are pushed out; they are not pulled out. Given the choice they would stay at their home 

place (Stein, 1981, 322).  

 

“Push factors” which trigger the mobility of people is rather narrowly defined. At 

the legal level, according to the official UN definition of a refugee, as well as in the 

Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement prepared by the Representative of the UN 

Secretary-General on IDPs, there are no clear references to other factors (e.g. economic 

factors, extreme poverty, famine) than “fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, 

                                                 
5 Different concepts are used to refer to involuntariness and voluntariness of migration, such as compulsory 
migration  or  economic  migration  (Mooney,  2005,  p.  13).  For  a  brief  discussion  on  different  meanings  of 
involuntary, voluntary and compulsory see Flew, 1971, p. 226, as cited in Turton, 2006, p. 22. 
6 Immobility of those who have decided not to migrate—despite strong predisposing factors—should also be 
part  of  forced  migration  studies;  that  is,  a  question  should  be  asked  from  a  reverse  perspective:  Why  do 
people not migrate? Stepputat argues that “those who did not flee may have endured the same violations of 
human  rights  as  those  who  fled,  but  by  choosing  to  stay  they  do  not  qualify  for  special  attention  […]  this 
analysis does not to reduce the ‘refugee problem’ to ‘that of mobility’ […], but shows how sedentary images 
may lead us to a skewed analysis of necessities and vulnerabilities of different groups in particular contexts” 
(1999, p. 417). For an example of “displacement-in-place” from Zimbabwe, see Magaramombe, 2010. 
7 These assumptions are highly influenced by neoclassical theories of economics and rational choice theories. 
For an example see Sjaastad, 1962; for a comparative analysis of migration theories see Massey et al. 1993. 

17 

 

religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion” (UN, 

1951) and “the effects of armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, violations of 

human rights or natural or human-made disasters” (UN, 2005). 

 

This definition has been criticized/challenged from different perspectives. For 

example, DeWind has emphasized that there are other factors that cause “forced” 

migration of people, asking:  

Why should international agencies be compelled to protect one member who is 

fleeing torture or conflict that deprives him of political rights but not another who is 

fleeing starvation resulting from her being deprived of social, cultural, or economic 

rights? 8 (2007, p. 382) 

Still, Erin Mooney, who has been the senior advisor of Representative of the UN 

Secretary-General on IDPs since 2001, has argued that it is important to maintain the 

distinction between IDPs and economic migrants. She quotes from Cohen and Deng:  

Expanding the IDP definition further to encompass persons who migrate because of 

extreme poverty or other economic problems had been proposed during the 

formulation of the definition and to this day is a suggestion that sometimes is put 

forth. The IDP definition, however, does not extend to these groups. This is because 

in most cases the element of coercion is not so clear” (Cohen & Deng, 1998, p. 17; 

as cited in Mooney, 2005, p. 13). 

This shows us that forced migration is not only defined as an outcome of strong push 

factors, but also that those factors are themselves divided into different categories, only 

some of which provide for a “sufficient reason” to be treated as a forced migrant.  

 

In reality, however, economic factors co-exist with other factors at the same place 

and time, thus constituting a much more complex picture of displacement. It is therefore 

                                                 
8 This  debate  is  also  related  to  the  discussions  on  the  “authenticity”  of  asylum  seekers.  For  a  debate  on 
economic refugees, “genuine” asylum seekers and “deserving victims” see Pratt and Valverde, 2002. 

18 

 

hardly possible to make a clear distinction between voluntary migrants and involuntary 

ones. In most cases, as empirical data from various contexts (e.g. Aysa-Lastra, 2011) show, 

identifying involuntary migration solely with the decisive role of push factors neglects the 

importance of such factors as e.g. conditions in the destination places that attract migrants, 

or the existing migration regimes which allow (or restrict) migrants’ options and abilities.  

 

Another counter-argument is that there are not also necessarily plenty of choices for 

“voluntary” migrants, or as Sonia McKay claims: “in reality choices may be extremely 

restricted in the case of economic migrants, nor is it the case that there are no choices in 

the case of [forced migrants].” Further, she adds, “while not wishing to ignore or minimize 

these differences, it is equally evident that the two groups [economic migrants and forced 

migrants] share a number of common experiences” (2009, p. 11, 15). 

 

David Turton emphasizes the difficulty to distinguish forced migrants from other 

migrants only by considering and looking at the push factors:  

The methodological problem [when trying to identify forced migrants] is that it 

proves impossible to apply the term forced migration to the real world in a way that 

enables us to separate out a discrete class of migrants. It turns out, on closer 

inspection, that most migrants make their decision to migrate in response to a 

complex set of external constraints and predisposing events. Of course, those 

constraints and events vary in their salience, significance and impact, but there are 

elements of both compulsion and choice, it seems, in the decision making of most 

migrants (2003, p. 8-9). 

I believe that the counterarguments clearly show that we cannot understand forced 

migration as a simple outcome of push factors, it is necessary to locate it within a broader 

and more complex socio-economic context, which will further inevitably blur the borders 

between the categories of voluntary and involuntary migration. Moreover, this perspective 

 

19 

invites us to steer our focus from push factors or unexpected events to agent-structure 

relations and to accept the experiences of forced migrants as unit of analysis in a research 

project. This need and arguments of the critical forced migration literature on this issue 

will be analyzed in detail later, in third section of this chapter. 

 

Common Stages of Forced Migration 

 

Conventional forced migration narrative also has very strong references to common 

temporal stages of migration, and transition from the “status of nativeness” to being 

“rootlessness”. According to the conventional narrative, as Sorensen summarizes, the 

trajectory of forced migrants can be divided into three main stages: home-out-home. “The 

temporal and spatial point of departure is the ‘home’ area of the displaced person, where 

she lived prior to displacement and is the socially and culturally familiar environment in 

which the displaced person has developed a sense of integrity and identity.” Movement of 

a forced migrant continues with the in-limbo phase, “out”, where migrants are 

encountering various kinds of social, economic and psychological difficulties and 

challenges. After full-integration into the host place and society, the process finishes with a 

new “home” (Sorensen, 1997, p. 145-146). 

 

According to another anthropologist, Liisa Malkki, it is often assumed that “[home] 

is not only the normal but the ideal habitat for any person, the place where one fits in, lives 

in peace, and has an unproblematic culture and identity.”(1995, p. 509) Therefore, people 

who live in their homelands, in other words “natives” of their territory, are thought to be 

ideally adapted to their environments. This shows us that the idea of home has strong 

references to “spatial incarceration of native” (Malkki, 1992, p. 29) or, as Appadurai 

argues: “… it means is that natives are not only persons who are from certain places, and 

 

20 

belong to those places, but they are also those who are somehow incarcerated, or confined, 

in those places”9 (1992, p.35). 

 

Moving from “home”, in other words, from the “right place” to lead a life in 

harmony, is seen as a morally and socially destructive experience which leads to acute 

loneliness10 and loss of all social networks and capitals. Oliver-Smith argues that the 

forced migration and resettlement processes are invariably difficult and painful, 

engendering feelings of powerlessness and alienation as people are uprooted from their 

familiar circumstances. Whole communities suffer acute degrees of disintegration as 

community structures, social networks and even kin groups may be dispersed to different 

resettlement sites (1991, 133). 

Another important feature of the conventional narrative is its tendency to 

homogenize the experiences of forced migrants and make references to shared experiences 

and trajectories. For example, in his article on the “stages of refugee experience”, Barry 

Stein gives us more insight into the details of the home-out-home trajectory, but also 

illustrates how the experiences of forced migrants are treated as experiences of 

homogenous group of victims. According to Stein, forced migrants experience various 

stages during their home-out-home movement. Firstly, they perceive a threat, decide to 

flee, and experience a period of extreme danger and flight. Having safely reached the 

settlement area, people try to adjust to the new conditions. Finally, forced migrants 

integrate in their new homes, which is accompanied by changes in their behavior caused by 

the experience (1981). 

                                                 
9 Some scholars have, opposing the sedentarist bias in migration studies, emphasized the need for a different 
understanding of nativeness and suggested introducing new areas of research, such as “sociology of exile and 
displacement” (Castles, 2003, p. 14), and “nomadology” (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987, p. 23; as cited in 
Malkki, 1992, p. 31). 
10 Malkki argues on the social and moral dimensions of displacement that “[t]he point here is obviously not to 
deny  that  displacement  can  be  a  shattering  experience.  It  is  rather  this:  Our  sedentarist  assumptions  about 
attachment to place lead us to define displacement not as a fact about sociopolitical context, but rather as an 
inner,  pathological  condition  of  the  displaced”  (1992,  p.  33).  For  a  discussion  on  pathological  aspects  of 
displacement see Oliver-Smith, 1991 and Kunz, 1981, p. 46-47. 

21 

 

It is obvious from Stein´s (and the others’) point that the society is conceived as a 

completed project, to which (forced) migrants could only integrate themselves., as it is 

migrants who should change their way of living or behaviors in accordance with the norm-

system of the new home. Looking from a perspective of sedentarism, migration–and 

especially forced migration that happens “suddenly”–poses a great threat to the “society as 

a completed project”. Therefore, forced, unexpected and uncontrollable movement of 

people is not desirable; if it happens, according to the conventional narrative, it should at 

least be controlled and treated as a “problem”. 

 

In the conventional narrative, transformative role of forced migrants is largely 

neglected. As it has been observed, it is not only forced migrants who try to adjust their 

lifestyles or behaviors: host places and societies are also being transformed by the forced 

migration. As Sorensen has argued, “identities and places are continuously being re-

created by people in their efforts to gain control over their own lives” (1997: p. 161). 

Therefore, forced migration has not only left traces in social and physical structure of 

sending areas, but it has also brought great challenges for the receiving areas, such as 

urbanization, housing, infrastructural difficulties, as well as changing ethnic composition 

of the society, that could foster social clashes (or, in a positive case, mutual tolerance and 

co-existence). Therefore, forced migrants actively participate in the “making of the 

society” rather than they stay a passive subject of the changes who could only socialize by 

integrating into the existing social structure.  

 

We have seen that the conventional narrative approach largely neglects not only the 

ability of forced migrants to mobilize their capitals and networks in order to find places 

where there are more opportunities, safety and more shared norms (e.g. diasporas, co-

ethnic neighborhoods), but it also neglects their creativity and skills to transform the places 

and society in general.  Contrary to the conventional narrative, if we take into account the 

 

22 

transformative power of forced migration, we will also be able to see the experiences of 

displaced people as inventive (Colson, 2003, p. 15) and constructive experiences 

(Sorensen, 2003, 147), rather than unfairly dismissing them as pathological (Oliver-Smith, 

1991). 

 

Unpreparedness of Forced Migrants 

 

The third important assumption of the conventional forced migration narrative is 

the unpreparedness of migrants as a result of the abruptness of the events that led to 

migration. In many cases, of course, migrants do not have enough time to make 

preparations, as well as it is true that a conflict can escalate suddenly. However, accepting 

these two features as a common point for all forced migrants means to generalize, 

homogenize their experiences, and to underestimate the abilities of migrants to follow the 

changes around them and anticipate possible events.11 

 

Bediz Yilmaz’s observations on Kurdish displaced people in Turkey differ from 

what I have observed during my fieldwork. Yilmaz argues that  

Kurdish conflict-affected migrants have to leave their villages with no preparation: 

they continue to literally arrive in the city overnight” and, further, that “the 

newcomers have to migrate as whole families, whereas their predecessors were part 

of chain-migration process, leaving the place of origin gradually as the pioneers 

settled down in the cities and found employment (2003, 36). 

As it will be presented in detail in the next chapter, in contrast to Yilmaz’s observations, 

my fieldwork data have shown that Kurdish forced migrants, depending on several factors, 

have foreseen to a certain extent that the insecurity in the region was increasing and had 

time to make preparations. Sorensen, using her fieldwork experiences, has also argued that  
                                                 
11 For different models of classifications of forced migrants based on the range of options and constraints see 
Richmond’s  reactive/proactive  migration  model  (1993),  and  on  the  ability  to  anticipate  coming  threats  see 
Kunz’s acute/anticipatory forced migration model (1973, 1981). 

23 

 

many IDPs were agents who envisaged and prepared for more radical changes in 

livelihoods, which could only be identified by asking people about their visions, just 

like the expansion of the historical perspective revealed that forced migration, often 

perceived to be sudden and unexpected, had been anticipated and prepared for 

several years before it actually happened (2003, p. 11).  

In a number of testimonies and migrants´ biographies (e.g., Göç-Der, 2008) it has been 

emphasized that there had been no time for preparation before the flight. However, people 

who experienced similar difficulties could have different levels of preparations.  

 

In the next chapter, I will focus more on the preparedness of forced migrants and 

the similarities between chain and forced migration flows in practice. Here I would like to 

briefly argue that differences between our observations of a group of people who have 

experienced similar type of pressures, violent attacks or lived in insecure environments, 

under war conditions, clearly show that there are different levels of preparations of 

displaced people.  

  

3.2.  Forced Migration as a Policy Making Category and a Label 

 

Definitions in policy and legal sphere require precise criteria. Having (or not 

having) a certain legal status provides people with access to certain benefits (e.g. legal 

protection for a refugee) and/or brings them particular duties (e.g. legal duties of a citizen). 

Having a legal status, in other words, fitting into a certain definition, is the main key to 

receiving certain benefits (or duties). 

 

However the ways people perceive their own situation, and the ways they tell their 

stories of displacement might completely differ from the legal level, on which forced 

migrants are expected to prove their vulnerability (i.e. to prove that they were or are under 

 

24 

threat and had to leave their homes involuntarily) in order to fulfill the requirements of 

certain definitions. 

 

People are asked to prove the authenticity of their plight, which would then allow 

them to become accepted as a member of a pre-defined group of beneficiaries. The 

experiences of people are thus reduced into a matter of bureaucratic labeling, which further 

leads to assumption that their characteristics, needs and wants are homogenous (Ayata  

& Yükseker, 2005, p. 12-13). 

 

There are two points that should be particularly emphasized. Firstly, in policy-

making sphere it is assumed that people who fall into the same category share particular 

qualities, which further makes it reasonable to subject all these people to the same 

outcomes of policy (Bakewell, 2008, p. 436). Experiences of displaced people are being 

generalized in order to set out criteria which define who will be considered as a member of 

a particular group. Secondly, same categories and definitions stay valid at different places 

and at different moments. As Oliver Bakewell has argued that 

policy categories are likely be fairly invariant over time (they mean the same today 

as yesterday) and space (they are interpreted in the same way in the field as in 

headquarters for national policy, or in Zambia as in Sierra Leone, for global policy) 

(p. 436).  

But at the same time he also acknowledged that categories cannot be subject to constant 

revision, because “it is likely to cause confusion and potentially the collapse of the policy.” 

(p. 436).  

 

Defining the common (one could even argue “natural”) conditions of displacement 

and generalization of the needs of displaced people has turned migrants into the “objects of 

policy sphere”. Depending on whether they are able to match the definition, certain people 

are granted rights and given access to benefits, whereas the others, although they might 

 

25 

have similar experiences, are being rejected. One important relevant example in practice 

would be the similar experiences and yet different statuses of internationally and internally 

displaced people. 

 

Generalization of displacement experiences makes displaced people seem, as 

Malkki also noticed, “almost like an essentialized anthropological ‘tribe’”. She has argued 

that  

[forced migrants] thus become not just a mixed category of people sharing a certain 

legal status; they become ‘a culture’, ‘an identity’, ‘a social world’, or ‘a 

community’. There is a tendency, then, to proceed as if all [forced migrants] shared 

a common condition of nature (1995, p. 511).  

The similar points between conventional narrative of displacement and the main features of 

“forced migration” understood as a legal label imply that forced migration studies have 

always been connected with policy-making sphere. In various ways, they have reinforced 

each other and contributed to (re-)production of a discourse on forced migration that is 

based on categorization of forced migrants solely in terms of their legal status, rather than 

by focusing on their unique experiences. Furthermore, this forced migration discourse has 

also contributed to the processes of de-contextualization of forced migration cases, 

reducing them to outcomes of unconnected emergencies or of other problems such as 

regional underdevelopment and administrative inabilities of “failed states”. 

 

David Turton has emphasized that the language we use to talk about forced 

migration has necessary implications on the way we think about it. He argues that the 

language of the legal sphere is not the language of migrants themselves. “The language of 

migration, in other words, is spoken from a sedentary, or state-centric perspective. It is the 

language we use to talk about them.” (2003, p. 4). As Zetter has argued, labeling process is 

non-participatory, rather “[it] is a process of designation, for it involves making judgments 

 

26 

and distinctions” (1991, p. 45). The way we talk about forced migration (language that is 

used to define forced migration, its categories and labels) on one hand, and policy-making 

processes, legal definitions, humanitarian assistance practices on the other hand, are 

intimately linked. According to Turton, “language and practice form a discourse which 

constructs forced migration for us” (2003, p. 10-11).  

 

To describe movements created by armed conflicts and forced migration, a number 

of new subject categories has been generated, e.g. “demobilized combatants”, “war 

prisoners”, “refugees”, “internally displaced persons” or “vulnerable groups”. According to 

Sorensen, all of these terms stress people´s roles in conflict and kinds of vulnerability, so 

consequently “[this] perspective suggests that the problem and its solution are seen as 

constituting one entity, both the outcome of ‘productive power’” (2003, p. 8). 

 

Wood argues that “labeling is a way of referring to the process by which policy 

agendas are established and more particularly the way in which people, conceived as 

objects of policy are defined in convenient images” (1985, p. 1). By producing an image of 

“essential forced migrants”, a restricted and exclusive regime of humanitarian aid is 

constructed. Moreover, within the discourse of displacement, geographies (“war zones”, 

“failed states”, “asylum countries”), displaced people (“internally displaced persons”, 

“fake asylum seekers”, “genuine refugees”) and relevant institutions (international 

organizations, local authorities, “incapable governments”) are being relabeled and a 

hierarchical order among them is being established. For instance, “fake asylum seeker” 

generator countries or “failed states” are placed on the lowest strata of the hierarchy, 

whereas the international organizations, mainstream research institutions and security-

development agencies are perceived as the main knowledge and policy producers. That has 

reinforced the idea that vulnerable and desperate forced migrants could only be back to 

 

27 

their “homes” with the assistance of humanitarian organizations which have enough 

knowledge and capacity to deal with vulnerable populations. 

 

3.3.  Critical Approach to Forced Migration Literature 

 

This section aims to sum up the main arguments of critical perspective to forced 

migration literature that have not been explored in the previous sections. I would like to 

focus on primarily two main contributions of the critical approach. Firstly, critical 

approach invites us to focus on the actor-structure relations and displaced people 

themselves, instead of focusing only on other actors, such as states and institutions. This 

does not mean that the influences of institutions in migration are ignored in this approach. 

Instead, we steer our focus to individuals, networks and structures which are inevitably in 

contact with those institutions, and yet different from them. Secondly, it deconstructs the 

arguments of conventional narrative and offer more analytical understanding of 

categorization for the analysis of displacement. 

 

While in conventional forced migration narrative it is often asked “why” people 

leave their places, “what” would be the criteria for the policy making and “who” can be 

considered as the recipient of benefits, critical approach to forced migration studies is more 

concerned with “how” questions: How do people perceive their own situation? How do 

they migrate? How do they try to activate different means during their flight? How does 

the current migration regime of a place influence their flight? How do their socio-

economic background and their interaction with the legal and social structure affect their 

choice of destination, settlement and post-migration situation?  

 

When we look at individual cases of forced migrants, generalizing the experiences 

and stages migrants are going through seems almost impossible. Some displacement cases 

show us that different persons, even when they come from the same family and 

 

28 

background, nevertheless experience and interpret their displacement differently. In other 

words, even slightly different structural factors, individual abilities and specific events can 

lead to different displacement experiences (Roque, 2008, p. 380).  

 

Critical approach to forced migration has emphasized “normality” and 

“ordinariness” of a displaced person, unlike the approaches which depict displaced people 

as passive victims of unexpected emergencies. Understanding forced migrants as passive 

victims and something “exceptional” inside a society means at the same time largely 

failing to see the “normality” of forced migrants. It means ignoring the fact that migrants—

before, during and after their migration—actively try to influence other actors on the field, 

make choices although they may be scarce of them, depending on their social and class 

positions try to mobilize their networks, anticipate and calculate the costs and benefits one 

destination has over the other; that they maximize capitals they possess and transform one 

type of capital into another type.  

 

In order to overcome the methodological difficulty caused by separating forced 

migrants from voluntary migrants, David Turton suggests “to think of forced migrants as 

‘ordinary people’, or ‘purposive actors’, embedded in particular social, political and 

historical situations” (2003, p. 2). Therefore, as other types of migration, displacement 

should also be treated as an outcome of wider processes of social and economic change. 

Similarly, Castles argues that, like the analysis of every single social phenomenon, the 

analysis of forced migration also requires an awareness of its embeddedness in the social 

reality (2003, p. 22). Therefore, critical approach to forced migration methodologically 

takes a more relationalist12 position and suggests looking at two levels that interrelate and 

                                                 
12 It  is  important  to  note  that  what  is  suggested  here  in  terms  of  methodology  is  that  the  actor  and  the 
structure  should  not  be  perceived  as  two  different  entities.  The  word  “relationalist”  is  used  in  terms  of  
Bourdieu’s sociology, in which the “primacy of relations” is affirmed “against all forms of methodological 
monism that purport to assert the ontological priority of structure or agent, system or actor, the collective or 
individual” (Wacquant, 1992, p. 15). Above mentioned distinctions (e.g., thinking actor and structure as two 
different unconnected entities) “prevent us from grasping the logic of social interweaving. . . . and . . . [s]uch 

29 

 

mutually influence each other: (1) social world, including displaced persons’ relations with 

it and  (2) individual experiences or, in Emanuel Marx’s terms, “innumerable egocentred 

social worlds” of displaced people (1990, p. 193). 

 

Instead of looking solely at particular events (e.g., an armed conflict) as a cause of 

mass displacement of people, Stephen Castles, in his article on forced migration and social 

transformation, suggests looking at forced migration issues from a broader perspective and 

focusing on forced migration as a phenomenon embedded in particular socio-economic 

context. He argues that, on a global level, forced migration could not be treated as a result 

of unconnected emergencies but rather as an integral part of North-South relations. 

According to Castles, theories of forced migration should be linked to literature on 

economic migration and dependency theories (2003, p. 17-19). Since he is dealing with 

refugee issues, Castles discusses forced migration in a global context and uses the North-

South dichotomy. I think that it would be plausible to follow the same theoretical approach 

and to link internal displacement to different types of migration. However, I would like to 

avoid what seems to be a too simplistic aspect of interpretation: using the geographical 

“underdeveloped-developed” dichotomy in order to analyze the motivations behind the 

migration decisions might overshadow the uniqueness of experiences of displaced people 

and the complex picture of displacement. 

 

To a certain extent, there is a match between legal definitions, policy-making 

categories and “individual experiences of displacement”. However, due to the above 

mentioned limitations (inevitable tendency to generalize and objectify the displacement 

experiences), categories used in the policy sphere (the policy-relevant categories) fail to 
                                                                                                                                                    
dualistic  alternatives  reflect  a  commonsensical  perception  of  social  reality  of  which  sociology  must  rid 
itself.” Therefore, social science does not have to choose “between these poles, … reality –of action no less 
than structure, and their intersection as history- lies in relations (p. 15). 
Wacquant further has argued that Bourdieu “deploys such a conception, as evidenced by the fact that both of 
his key concepts of habitus and field designate bundles of relations [emphasis is original]. A field consists of 
a set of objective, historical relations between positions anchored in certain forms of power (or capital), while 
habitus consists of a set of historical relations ‘deposited’ within individual bodies in the form of mental and 
corporal schemata of perception, appreciation, and action” (p. 16). 

30 

 

include unique time and space-specific aspects of displacement, i.e., the constant 

interaction of displaced people with a particular space and in a particular time. Rather than 

analyzing displacement and its affects using the categories which are designed to be used 

globally (in every time and under all different circumstances), in critical analysis of 

displacement, in Bakewell’s words, “policy-irrelevant categories” are needed (2008).   

 

Bakewell points out the constraints in questions we ask within the boundaries of 

policy approach:  

If researchers accept these boundaries of the field and steer clear of asking difficult 

questions—such as how important are economic motivations and social networks in 

the mass movement of refugees—they will tend to confirm and legitimize the 

assumptions made by powerful actors, such as states, and ensure that they remain 

taken-for-granted. […] this runs counter to the very fundamental task of researchers 

to “reflect critically” (p. 438) 

In contrast to the conventional forced migration narrative, critical approaches to forced 

migration have strongly emphasized the importance of unique stories of displaced people. 

In this respect, “voices” of displaced people appear as one of the main units of analysis. 

Focusing on the stories shed light on inner dynamics of displacement. Moreover, it 

provides us with an opportunity to explore the abilities of migrants and the role of various 

factors in displacement cases. As the last word for this chapter, I would like to note that in 

critical approaches factors in destination places are recognized and their role is also 

stresses. However, it does not mean that the push factors are completely ignored as 

decisive factors in the forced mobility of people. What critical approach has suggested is 

that looking beyond of the analysis of why people leave their home places and including 

other factors (i.e. pull factors) into the analysis of displacement. 

 

 

31 

4.  AҭALYSIS OF ETHҭOGRAPHIC DATA 

 

 

In his article on Iranian asylum seekers in the Netherlands, Khalid Koser used 

“asylum cycle” model to analyze the role of the social networks in asylum seeking. He 

suggested that there are three main stages of forced migration: preflight, flight and exile. 

These different stages imply different conditions that influence migrants’ ability to 

mobilize their networks and capitals (1997, p. 594). 

 

Following Koser’s model, I would also like to analyze experiences of displaced 

people in a chronological order, from preflight to post-migration. In order to illustrate the 

preflight conditions, I will first focus on the complexity of “push factors” and their 

combination, asking the question why people had to or decided to leave their places. 

Putting an accent on questions such as to what extent people´s decisions to flee depended 

on the level of threat they felt, and how they experienced the outcomes of the conflict, I 

will try to demonstrate the diversity of their answers. Another question I am interested in 

would be how the respondents interpreted the role of other factors in the region, such as 

underdevelopment or insufficient social welfare system. 

 

After analyzing why and how people decided to migrate, I would like to continue 

with the other side of the continuum and analyze various factors that have influenced 

migration and settlement strategies of displaced people, such as existing ties with 

destination places, various kinds of capitals, social networks and ability of migrants to 

activate their ties in destination places. 

 

Further, I will focus on post-migration situation of the migrants. Here, I would also 

like to link displacement to a broader context and argue that it has impacted both political 

and economic structure of the country and take a different standpoint than the researchers 

who argue that displaced people could only build their new homes by integrating into the 

 

32 

existing society. Rather, I argue that forced migrants actively participate in creating of their 

own stories and spaces in the cities. They construct new kinds of modes of belonging and 

identity. In this respect I will focus on two issues. Firstly I will discuss the changing modes 

of belonging in cities after displacement. Secondly, I aim to examine the impacts of shared 

experiences—such as displacement and discrimination faced in the cities—on making of 

Kurdish identity in the cities.  

 

I would like to finish this chapter with an analysis of the story of displacement of 

one person, of Selim, in order to illustrate how displaced people are shifting between 

different categories depending on the context they tell their stories and on the level they 

claim (or deny) that they are forced migrants. 

 

4.1.  Complexity of Push Factors in Displacement  

 

Internal displacement - just as forced migration in general - could hardly be 

examined as an outcome of one particular event or action. Although internal or 

international displacement cases are categorized under specified labels such as “conflict-

induced displacement”, “forced resettlement due to mega-development projects”, “natural 

disaster-induced resettlement” or  “climate-change-induced forced migration”, most of the 

time the dynamics behind the displacement of a person or a group of people is more 

complex and has more than one cause. 

 

General Insecurity in the Region and Other Factors 

 

One of the most mentioned reasons to leave hometowns was the general insecure 

environment in the region. Many of my respondents repeatedly mentioned that staying 

became more dangerous for them, regardless of whether the danger was caused by attacks 

or harassment by the security forces, village guards or the PKK.  

 

33 

 

For the local population, joining the village guards was sometimes the only 

possibility to stay in the village. 

There were eighty households in our village. It was not a small village. One day 

military officials came and talked with muhtar13 of our village. He called all 

families and told that there are three options: Either you join village guards, or you 

go to mountains14, or you leave the village. We said we will not join village guards. 

None of the families accepted to join village guards and collaborate with the 

military. They gave us fifteen days to decide. After fifteen days, they came with 

great number of soldiers, maybe with 10.000 soldiers. They burned twenty five 

villages. . . . we had to leave . . . (Đsmail, personal communication, February 25, 

2012) 

One respondent’s father had first joined village-guards. But after two months he changed 

his mind and had to leave the village. 

My father joined village guards, although he didn’t want to and he was quite old. 

After one-two months, the state didn’t pay anything to him. He quitted and 

migrated to Istanbul where my brothers and I have already been settled. (Nuri, 

personal communication, March 01, 2012) 

Apart from the general insecurity pressure from security forces and village guards, the 

respondents identified several other reasons for their flight, among them the threat from the 

security forces, food and medicine embargoes, constant harassment by security forces, 

being controlled at the checkpoint at the entrance of the villages, economic depression, and 

lack of jobs.  

 

 

                                                 
13 Muhtar is an elected administrator of a village or of a city neighborhood. 
14 He means joining the PKK. 

 

34 

Restricted Access to Instrumental Freedoms 

 

As discussed in the third chapter, the importance of factors such as regional 

underdevelopment, poor economic conditions, famine, and the lack of political 

entitlements has not been acknowledged sufficiently by a number of institutions and 

experts. However, in reality, violence in a certain area leads to its economic stagnation, 

through decreasing production and consumption (raising consumption of arms could be an 

exception) and less market interactions, thus making for another motive to leave. In 

addition to that, due to an ongoing armed conflict people living in an affected area are not 

able to enjoy their fundamental rights such as the right to express their opinions freely, the 

right to work and the right to travel and so on, creating again an additional motive to leave.  

Predisposing factors of displacement do not have to be necessarily related to armed 

conflict, but also “extreme inequalities of wealth and resources between different countries 

and regions” appear as a factor that leads to forced migration (Richmond, 1993, 12). 

Therefore, in conflict-induced migration, in addition to the political reasons, there are also 

different structural factors at play. One of them is that development problems and 

development levels of both sending and receiving areas.  

 

Displacement and armed conflict have often been regarded as an undesirable 

outcome of regional underdevelopment.15 The common way of understanding the mobility 

of people as an outcome of economic underdevelopment is also exemplified in one of the 

interviews conducted by USCR researchers with a state official representing Turkey’s 

Foreign Ministry:  

There are no internally displaced persons in Turkey. We have freedom of 

movement. Everywhere is open. This is democracy. So, people are moving all over. 

Half of Istanbul’s population is Kurdish. Why? Because the economic situation is 

                                                 
15 For  an  example  of  this  perspective  on  a  global  scale  see.  Nyberg-Soresen,  Van  Hear  and  Engberg-
Pedersen, 2002, p. 34-35. 

35 

 

not so bright in the east. They go to Diyarbakır16, but will find themselves in bad 

conditions. So they want to move to the big cities for work… Migration is an 

expression of freedom. (USCR, 1999, p. 13) 

Apart from showing that internal displacement is a highly political issue, this statement 

also exemplifies how development is framed only with economic terms. Treating 

displacement of Kurds in Turkey as a part of existing internal migration regime (urban-

rural, East-West migration) largely masks the political dimension of forced migration and 

reduces the problem into an undesired outcome of economic underdevelopment. 

 

Rather than understanding development solely by using economic indicators, I 

suggest using Amartya Sen’s definition of development which would enable us to include 

the role of various freedoms, market participation of people, and political transparency into 

our analysis.  

 

Amartya Sen, in his book Development as Freedom argues that instrumental 

freedoms “tend to contribute to the general capability of a person to live more freely, but 

they also serve to complement one another”. Instrumental freedoms are political freedoms, 

economic facilities, social opportunities, transparency guarantees, and protective security 

(1999, p. 38-40). Rather than simply arguing that armed conflict and internal displacement 

are outcomes of economic underdevelopment, in the view of Sen’s approach to 

development and freedom, I argue that displacement and conflict are outcomes of a 

complex system in which benefits of development and instrumental freedoms are 

asymmetrically accessible to citizens.  

 

It is hard to argue that the five above mentioned instrumental freedoms are being 

enjoyed by the majority of population in the southeastern regions of Turkey. During my 

fieldwork in Turkey, many of the interviewees emphasized frequently the lack of stable 

                                                 
16 One of the biggest metropolitan areas of the southeastern region, mostly populated by the Kurds. 

36 

 

and secure political and social environment in which they could have enjoyed political 

freedoms, protective security and social welfare benefits.  

 

A Kurdish woman, Ayşe, who had to leave her village in 1995 told me that she is 

having difficulties in Istanbul, because she still cannot speak Turkish properly, but she is 

nevertheless prevented from going back: 

I really want to return to my village, I don’t want to stay in this city. Buildings are 

too high and dark. If we hadn’t had a disabled child, I wouldn’t have stayed a 

minute more. I cannot leave Istanbul. There are hospitals close to where we live” 

(personal communication, off-the-record, March 01, 2012). 

Access to social welfare system is the main determinant in Ayşe’s decision to stay in 

Istanbul where her daughter can receive medical care on a regular basis. Since the medical 

care system is not so developed in her hometown, medical care for her daughter would 

hardly be possible where she comes from, whether they could afford it or not. Ayşe’s 

husband told that they did not choose Istanbul due to economic reasons; they went first to 

Adana, a city neighboring their hometown. After the husband was released from prison, he 

had further problems with the military officials and the police: “We had no problem with 

money. We were not rich, but in Istanbul we are neither. There was political pressure on 

us, also in Adana. That is why we had to leave.” (Hasan, personal communication, off-the-

record,  March 01, 2012). 

 

Some of my respondents had once been well-off, before they moved to Istanbul. 

They had owned several houses and hundreds of sheep in their villages, and had not faced 

any serious economic difficulties. However, after the conflict started, their access to 

farmlands and common grasslands became restricted. They were not able to enjoy their 

economic freedoms anymore, and could not access the market (Selim, personal 

communication, February 25, 2012). Another displaced person states that 

 

37 

some people from the village accepted to become village guards. Therefore our 

village was not evacuated by the military. […] However, military built a big guard 

post close to our field; therefore we could not look after the field anymore and we 

had major economical difficulties. (Tarık, personal communication, March 01, 

2012) 

Tarık’s story shows us that when access to the instrumental freedoms, have been restricted, 

people start considering to leave for another place. Due to the lack of freedom, he decided 

to move to Istanbul. The city has not only provided them with more anonymity and new 

economic opportunities, but it has also given them access to well-organized legal Kurdish 

groups in which migrants could—to a certain extent—enjoy another instrumental freedom, 

political freedom.  

 

This diversity of reasons point out by the interviewees shows us that displacement 

has complex dynamics. In many cases, social and economic limitations blend with the 

general insecurity in the region. For that reason, the strategy of the state that differentiates 

between forced and economic migrants from the East proves not to be efficient in reality, 

as it cannot identify and encompass all diverse factors that function as push factors of 

migration. In the bigger scheme of factors, looking only at whether someone was directly 

attacked by military or the PKK loses its relevance. 

 

4.2.  Factors that Influenced Flight and Exile Stages 

 

Migration of a group of people, even when all of them started from the same place 

and ended up at the same place, is never one homogenous story, but consists of many 

completely different and unique stories. Thus, at different stages of migration—preflight, 

flight and exile—migrants’ interaction with the social networks and their ability to use 

 

38 

their social and economic capitals differ depending on the socio-economic structure and 

political obstacles. 

 

In this respect, this part of the study is concerned with the questions as to why 

people choose a certain place to migrate over the others, what factors play a decisive role 

in their choice of destination, what means are used by displaced people in order to settle in 

a place, how the existing relations with the destination places have affected their migration, 

to what extent various kinds of capitals play a role, to what extent migrants transform their 

social capitals into other types of capital (e.g. social capital into economic capital or the 

other way around). 

 

4.2.1.  Ties with Destination Places and the Role of Existing Migration Regime 

 

As discussed in the theoretical debate, current forced migration studies tend to 

ignore or give little attention to the factors that attract migrants to certain destination 

places. There are indeed factors “pulling” migrants to one particular place instead of to 

another one. Factors that attract a migrant to choose a place can be very diverse, ranging 

from personal contacts at the destination place to official resettlement programs and 

facilitative role of institutions.  

 

In his study on Somalian asylum seekers in Norway, Munzoul Assal has found that 

kinship relations, family circumstances, social networks and legal framework at the 

destination place all contribute to the differentiation of migration trajectories and 

experiences. Assal has divided the pull factors into two main groups: institutional and 

individual pull factors. Institutional ones refer to legal framework, welfare system, 

restrictedness of migration and asylum regulations of a place; whereas individual pull 

factors mean such aspects as kinship relations, social networks and material and emotional 

support (2006).  

 

39 

 

In the lack of institutional assistance, personal ties and social networks gained 

particular importance in mobility of displaced people. They have influenced the decisions 

where and how to migrate17. Only almost one decade after the village evacuations started18, 

Turkish government introduced compensation (in 2004) and return programs (in 2004, Van 

Action Plan) (Yükseker & Kurban, 2009). None of my respondents has received any 

assistance from the state before and at the first stages of their migrations.  

 

Existing migration regime and forced migration intertwine on many levels. For 

instance, one of my respondents’ family already possessed a house in Istanbul before his 

village was burned by the soldiers. Since he is a disabled person, he was not planning to 

migrate to Istanbul like his brothers who had moved there long ago to work. But after his 

village was evacuated, his existing relation with Istanbul has immensely helped him 

(Đsmail, personal communication, February 27, 2012). Rather than considering that the 

family members have rationally calculated costs and benefits and decided to send some of 

the family members to Istanbul in order to have a safe place in another city; I believe that it 

is more a contingent process. Existing ties with placed and people are re-evaluated and 

activated during the flight and exile stages. 

 

While different factors have influenced migrants´ choice of destination, it appears 

that existing contacts one had in a certain place, as well as economic opportunities, are the 

most important ones for displaced people. Most of the time people follow the existing ties 

and try their luck at places where they already have family members or relatives. 

Đhsan, from Muş, tells why he has chosen Tekirdag: 

                                                 
17 Internal displacement cannot always be considered as a localized event. Some of the displaced people in 
Turkey  have  also  mobilized  their  transnational  ties  and  sought  for  refuge  in  other  countries.  In  this  case, 
individual and institutional factors have both played important roles in migration. Personal ties have provided 
for  the  necessary  arrangements  such  as  planning  the  flight,  providing  tickets,  papers,  legal  and  financial 
support, as well as, if needed, help of smugglers. On the other hand, political atmosphere, legal framework 
and  migration  regime  of  the  destination  countries  have  also  facilitated  flow  of  displaced  people.  For  a 
research  on  the  role  of  networks  in  the  migration  of  Kurdish  asylum  seekers  from  Turkey  in  Greece  see 
Papadopoulou, 2002. 
18 This is also shown by quantitative data from Turkey. See Barut, 2001 and Keser, 2011. 

40 

 

The main reason why I came to Çerkezköy19 was that my sister was already living 

here. After my father’s death, she moved to Çerkezköy to stay with my uncles and 

work at the factories. When I turned 18, I decided to leave the village. Because 

young men were having difficulties and there was nothing to do . . . no job . . . it 

was forbidden to go out after it is dark and young men were mostly having 

problems with the security forces. (personal communication, off-the-record, 

February 22, 2012) 

Another displaced person, Hasan, from Mardin, tells:  

After I was released from prison, there was still high pressure on me. We had to 

leave the village in 1993. After you leave your place, you first look where your 

relatives live. My brother was living in Adana and my sister was in Istanbul. We 

first moved to Adana,20 because I thought my sons can work in the agriculture and 

earn enough money to pay the rent and support the family. (personal 

communication, March 01, 2012) 

They stayed in Adana for two years. During this time, he tells, “We were living in Kurdish 

neighborhoods of Adana. We were uncovered. Security forces haven’t left me in peace and 

there was still pressure on me.” Afterwards, he decided to migrate to Istanbul where 

another close family member, his sister, had been living. Pressures from security forces 

and need for anonymity has influenced the decision to migrate one more time. After two 

years, Hasan mobilized another contact and tried his chances in Istanbul. “I thought that in 

Istanbul there will be less pressure and my sons and I could work in textile workshops”. 

Both in their migration from Mardin to Adana and from Adana to Istanbul, family relations 

played a decisive role. However, organization of the move second time was different from 

the first one: when, Hasan moved from Mardin to Adana, he brought all of his family 

                                                 
19 A part of Tekirdağ, its industrial zone. 
20 One of the biggest metropolises of the eastern Turkey. 

 

41 

members with, since it was not possible to stay in the village anymore. However, having 

found a safe shelter for his family members in Adana, he used another migration strategy 

for the next move, which is very similar to chain migration: 

At that time, it was hard to find a place in Istanbul, because migration flow to 

Istanbul was so intense. I came alone, left my family in Adana. I stayed two-three 

months with my sister. Then, I found a place in Eminönü21 and brought my family 

later. (personal communication, March 01, 2012) 

Hasan’s story leads to two conclusions. Firstly, his family relations at destination places 

allowed him to try his chances in two different places. Secondly, although people leave 

their places due to direct threat to their lives or due to general insecurity, they do make 

choices among limited options. If one does not work out, people try to mobilize another 

contact. Moreover, people calculate the risks of leaving or staying in one place. For Hasan, 

leaving his family behind and going to Istanbul alone was probably not possible when they 

were in Mardin. However, once he had found security for his family he was able to employ 

another migration strategy.  

 

Apart from contacts with family members and relatives at destination places, some 

of the respondents have had different relations with the cities. Some of them were coming 

to Istanbul to work as a temporary construction worker. That also appears as an important 

factor in choice of destination. 

 

Rıza migrated to Istanbul in 1994, without having gone previously to any other 

place.  

I didn’t have serious economic problems, I was producing enough for us and was 

going to gurbet22 to work. I was working at construction sites . . . usually someone 

from our village was coming first, and then calling the village. We were going to 

                                                 
21 A neighborhood in Istanbul. 
22 In Turkish, gurbet means a foreign land. In this context, however, it means going to another city to work 
temporarily. 

42 

 

work depending on the need for workers. I was working 2-3 months in Istanbul, 

and then going back to my village. 

After the conflict had started to affect his economic activity and created a threat for him, he 

decided to migrate to Istanbul, a city he was familiar with and where he already had some 

connections through his job history. He tells that he was able to find a place and a job after 

his arrival: “When I first came, I worked again at constructions as before” (personal 

communication, March 01, 2012). 

 

Migration can also be organized as a household strategy during the flight stage. 

Moreover, relations with the destination places could be established or maintained during 

the flight stage. For example, after he was taken into custody three times and his son was 

killed, Muzaffer decided to move to another place. First he migrated to a nearby city, 

Batman, where his brother had been living. Having moved to Batman, he sent two of his 

sons to Istanbul as “pioneers” of the family (they were 10 and 12 years old) to stay with his 

daughter who migrated before the military operations started. His sons started to work in 

Istanbul. Finally, Muzaffer and his wife also migrated to Istanbul, after staying one and a 

half years in Batman at his brother’s place (personal communication, February 28, 2012). 

In this instance, not only human capital of a family is maximized, but the household also 

diversified its options by sending some family members to a different place during their 

flight. 

 

4.2.2.  Economic Capital 

 

In his study on Sri Lanka and Somalia, Nicholas Van Hear argued that there is a 

hierarchy of destinations that can be reached by migrants, according to the resources—

financial and network based—that they can call upon. Class positions affect routes taken, 

 

43 

means of migration and destinations reached. In other words, more desirable destinations 

are usually accessible to better resourced migrants (2004).   

 

In settlement decisions of displaced Kurds in Turkey, economic capital has not only 

influenced the migration routes taken, but it has also created huge differences especially 

during first stages of resettlement. Selim from Hakkari tells his story:  

First we didn’t want to come to Istanbul. . . . We had almost 700 sheep and several 

houses. We were living in prosperity. When conflict has started we sold all animals 

and moved to Van. When we moved to Van, none of us worked during the first 

year. We had enough money and there was no job. . . . We continued living in Van, 

as we were in the village . . . after 1,5 year, we ran out of money. My two brothers, 

one sister and I decided to move to Istanbul. (personal communication, February 

25, 2012) 

Selim’s story illustrates very well how the amount of economic capital migrants have 

influences their decisions where to migrate or whether to stay or go to another place.  

 

Another respondent’s story emphasizes the importance of combinations of 

economic capital and personal ties: “After our village was burned by the soldiers, I went to 

Istanbul. . . . I never paid rent in my life. My family members had already had a five-storey 

building in Bağcılar23”. While one part of the displaced people migrated to big cities and at 

first spent some time at homes of their relatives and family members, Đsmail could stay 

with his family in his own apartment after his arrival.  As a displaced person, he could 

even provide assistance to his fellow townsman, who had no means to stay alone after their 

arrival to Istanbul: “I don’t remember really well. But almost one year twenty people lived 

at our place. Our apartments have four rooms. Children were sleeping at the entrance” 

(Đsmail, personal communication, February 27, 2012) 

                                                 
23 A neighborhood in Istanbul. 

 

44 

 

4.2.3.  Capability to Activate Connections 

 

Social networks model might explain most of the intra-community relations. 

However, I believe that active role of the migrants deserves a particular interest. As seen in 

the examples from the field, to a certain extent, migrants do make choices among limited 

options and try to diversify their strategies. As emphasized in Bourdieu’s approach to 

social capitals, durable networks and the ability of an agent to mobilize a network of 

connections play important roles. Boudieu argues that 

the aggregate of the actual or potential resources which are linked to the possession 

of a durable network….The volume of the social capital possessed by a given agent 

thus depends on the size of the network of connections he can effectively mobilize 

and on the volume of capital …possessed by a given agent, or even by the whole 

set of agents to whom he is connected (emphasises added; Bourdieu, 1986, p. 248-

249; as cited in Van Hear, 2004, p. 5) 

At different stages of migration, social networks, personal ties and capitals bring both 

different possibilities and various constraints. Therefore, I argue that analyzing the role of 

ties, networks, institutions and capitals will not always provide us with enough reasons for 

concluding why displaced people moved to a one place instead of to another one. We 

should acknowledge that the possible benefits migrants could get from social ties and 

capitals are highly dependent on the extent to which migrants mobilize them. Thus, social 

networks, existing relations with the receiving places, relations with the migration regimes 

play particularly important roles in migration only as long as migrants actively try to 

mobilize and invest in them.24  

                                                 
24  Similarly,  social  capital  also  appears  as  an  uncertain  resource.  Pathirage  and  Collyer  have  also 
acknowledged that, emphasizing the active role of migrants: “actors are aware of this and actively work to 
maintain the advantages inherent in social relations” (2011, p. 316). 

45 

 

 

Migrants’ ability to maintain, in Granovetter’s terms, their strong ties and to 

establish weak ties25 at destination places provide migrants with more opportunities. For 

instance, Đhsan’s sister, who has been working in Tekirdağ and staying with her uncle 

could already afford to buy a half-constructed building. After Đhsan has also migrated to 

Tekirdağ, he and his brothers finished the building, and the whole family started living 

there. He has encountered no housing problem; however, for him it was hard to find a job. 

One day, when he was searching for job, he heard that someone from his hometown has a 

factory in Çerkezköy. He introduced himself as a town fellow and got the job in the 

factory, where he worked almost three years (personal communication, off-the-record, 

February 22, 2012). This instance exemplifies the strength of the weak ties (i.e., loose ties 

among town fellows). 26 While people from his closest circle—his uncle, his sister and his 

friends from the same village—were not able to help him find a job, a weak tie, town-

fellowship relation, could provide him with employment opportunities. 

 

4.2.4.  Social Capital as a Transferable Asset: ҭuri’s Story 

 

In some cases displaced people have also actively tried to transfer their social 

capitals into economic capital (or other way around). In this section, I will focus on Nuri’s 

story and try to show how on different contexts his social capital is being activated and 

converted into other kinds of capitals. 

 

 The main reason why Nuri bought an apartment was the constant discrimination 

against Kurds in the housing market in Zeytinburnu. As a response to it, he decided to buy 

a place:  

When you go to a real estate agency, first they ask where you are from. I had to buy 

a house in the end, because it was almost impossible to find a place to rent. Instead 

                                                 
25 For his article on the strength of weak ties see Granovetter, 1973. 
26 For a research on the important role of town fellowship in internal migrant networks in Turkey, see Sema 
Erder’s article ”Where do you hail from?: Localism and networks in Istanbul” (1999). 

46 

 

of taking credit from a bank, everybody lends money to each other. If the house is 

20.000 [Turkish] Lira, someone gives 3.000, someone 2.000, some 5.000. For 

instance, I bought my place like this. I bought it for 14.000 USD I had only 3.000 

USD. Relatives and friends helped. (personal communication, March 01, 2012) 

In this example, two kinds of restrictive access lead to a creative action by a displaced 

person. First of all, access to apartments was restricted due to ethnic discrimination in the 

housing market. Nuri also stressed that his case was nothing exceptional. For Kurds, during 

1990s, it was very difficult to find a place. As a member of pro-Kurdish party, he was 

visiting the houses of Kurds, and he had the chance to observe poor conditions in which 

they live. He says that “[displaced people] were living either at the top floor or in the 

basement; you could not find any of them at the middle floors or in houses with decent 

conditions” (personal communication, March 01, 2012). 

 

Another restriction was purely financial. Nuri did not have enough money. 

Moreover, access to formal credit system was also restricted due to the lack of economy 

capital (i.e. lack of money in his account or no property that could be shown as a guarantee 

to pay back the debt). Receiving credit through formal channels is usually a costly action. 

People are supposed to pay loan interest and administration fees. As James Coleman has 

observed in Jewish community in New York, social capital and trust among community 

members could be used to reduce the economic interaction costs (1988, p. 99). Through 

social capital, actors can gain direct access to economic resources. Various kinds of 

capitals actors possess are transferable. As seen in Nuri’s example, although he had not had 

even one quarter of the price of a house, through his social capital, he gained direct access 

to the means that enabled him to buy a place. Insufficient access to housing, lack of 

durable networks and insufficient social capital led displaced people to search for other 

solutions to the problems. 

 

47 

 

Another observation from the field also provides us with more insight. Nuri has a 

textile material store. During the fieldwork, I spent almost three hours at his place and 

observed that none of the customers, all of them speaking Kurdish, paid in cash for what 

they bought. Nuri had an A3 size paper and wrote down what people buy. He told me that 

he would receive money later. This economic interaction without money also implies a set 

of trust relationships in which Nuri has been an important actor. 

 

However, the simple existence of a social network does not guarantee a set of 

benefits, as another example of Nuri shows: 

When I first arrived in Istanbul, I stayed with my relatives who were living and 

working at a construction site in Đkitelli.27 I was working until night on the 

construction. After that I was washing dishes and their clothes. They were not 

considerate at all. I was very young. 

Since Nuri did not have enough economic, cultural and social capital when he arrived, at 

the age of fourteen, he had to rely on largely his family’s social networks in Istanbul. At 

that time he had not been able to participate in the principle of reciprocity the way he was 

able to do it later, once he had settled and gained reputation in the community through his 

role in the political sphere (being a member of a pro-Kurdish party), in the interpersonal 

trust system, and informal monetary system (receiving loans, paying on time and 

borrowing money to others in need). The change in his social capital shows us that social 

network is not a solid entity; rather, it is set of relations that are subject to change over time 

and space, depending on the types and amount of capitals migrants possess.  

 

It is interesting to note that there are also some “not-so-desirable” consequences of 

social capital, as perceived by Alejandro Portes (1998). High-solidarity within the 

community may produce excessive claims on group members. However, getting closer 

                                                 
27 A neighborhood in Istanbul. 

 

48 

with the community members may be a strategy to avoid outside the Kurdish community. 

Therefore, although becoming a member of a certain community and maintaining your 

position within the community bring difficulties and challenges—such as being obliged to 

respond to demands within the existing framework of reciprocity in order to maintain the 

position in the interpersonal trust system—some of the displaced people still stayed in the 

community in order to protect themselves from discrimination, as well as to have access to 

certain benefits from the community.  

 

4.2.5.  Economic Strategies of Displaced People and Political Economy of 

Displacement 

 

Displaced people, in lack of any official social and economic assistance, employ 

different strategies to survive in big cities. These strategies, depending on class position 

and socio-economic background of the migrants range from working as an unskilled 

construction worker and sending family members to work on streets28 to opening a place 

and employ other family members or newcomers. 

 

Data from my fieldwork shows that many of my respondents were dealing with 

agriculture and animal husbandry before they were forced to leave their villages. When 

they first arrived to Istanbul and Tekirdag, they had either to learn a new job or had worked 

as an unskilled labor force in different sectors. For instance, Nuri started to work in the 

textile industry after his job in constructions; he had had several difficulties with his new 

job: “When I first started working in textile industry, I did not know what a pair of scissors 

is.”  (personal communication, March 01, 2012). Similarly, Hasan has stated that his new 

job in the city was completely different from what he was doing in the village: “I was a 

                                                 
28 Yükseker  has  argued  that  this  is  a  common  practice  for  displaced  people  in  the  big  cities.  For  further 
analysis see Yükseker, 2006. 

49 

 

farmer. I was working in cotton fields. In Istanbul I had to learn a new job from the 

beginning.” (personal communication, March 01, 2012) 

 

A research on urban integration of displaced people in Colombia also provides 

similar results. Aysa-Lastra argues that  

recent arrivals in host communities are concentrated in labor market niches usually 

in the informal or secondary labor market. These are generally low-status and low-

paying jobs. Recent forced migrants are employed in these jobs because they lack 

the credentials, social networks and information to compete in an urban labor 

market. Since overcoming barriers to successful participation in the urban labor 

market is unlikely for vulnerable populations, they remain in the lowest strata of a 

segmented labor market (2011, p. 278).  

In addition to working at the lowest strata of the labor market and learning a completely 

new profession from the beginning; another trend I observed in my fieldwork is to work as 

a whole family in a family-owned workshop. Rıza tells:  

we are working here as a family. There is no stranger. We work step by step, we 

manage to earn enough. If we bring strangers, other workers, when there is no job 

we will still have to pay. If we do not [pay], they do not [stay]. We work like this. 

We earn our bread. I know my kids.29 (personal communication, March 01, 2012) 

Although there is no comprehensive empirical data that measuring the impact of 

displacement of Kurds on the labor costs in Turkey, and their influence on the “economic 

boom” in the last decade (especially in textile and construction sectors), I would like to 

argue that displacement of Kurds has contributed to enlarging, in Marx’s terms, “reserve 

labor army” in Turkey. The relatively worse labor market positions30 of forced migrants 

                                                 
29 A  tendency  to  run  a  family  business  has  been  observed  in  other  interviews  with  displaced  people  (e.g., 
Tarık and Fatma) 
30 This argument is also supported by the surveys conducted by Keser (2011) and Barut(2001). 

50 

 

are directly linked to the demand and need for cheap labor in industrial sectors. Deniz 

Yükseker argues that  

forced migration left people at the mercy of the market forces in the cities where 

they migrated: having to work for cash incomes as well as having to supply their 

basic incomes (i.e. food and housing) in the market economy. (2006, p. 44) 

Further, Yükseker has provided some examples of strategies other than employment of the 

head of household and stated that  

sending kids out to sell packages of tissue paper and chewing gum is a typical 

coping strategy for poor IDP families who were driven to such rundown districts 

because of the low rents. Nevertheless, for those who are able to move into 

industrial districts in Istanbul where rents are much higher, finding jobs in small 

clothing workshops (often subcontractors for bigger companies) is not difficult. 

(p.50)  

Taking the point of view of political economy, I would like to argue that displacement and 

dispossession of Kurdish farmers has not only forced them to change their economic 

activity and turned them into (mostly cheap and informal) labor force in neo-liberalized 

Turkish economy, but it also made impacts on the ethnic composition of the working class 

in Turkey. In other words, raising influence of Kurds in working class is in large an 

outcome of displacement and proletarianization of Kurdish farmers and their children who 

were born in the big cities.31 

 

As seen from the fieldwork data, displaced people employ different strategies at 

flight and settlement stages of their displacement. Family and kinship relations play 

particularly important roles in choice of destination. Moreover, existing ties with the 

destinations places and interactions with the existing internal migration regime in Turkey 
                                                 
31 This  argument  has  also  been  used  during  the  election  campaigns  of  the  BDP  and  of  several  socialist 
groups.    For  a  video  of  a  BDP  candidate  see  http://www.bbc.co.uk/turkce/haberler/2011/06/110608_ 
election_alkan_blognot8.shtml 

51 

 

(e.g., employing chain migration strategies) have been the other main factors in settlement 

strategies. In addition to social networks and personal contacts, various kinds of capitals 

and migrants’ abilities to transfer them from one to another have influenced migration 

processes of forced migrants in Turkey.  

 

As the diversity of push factors, diversity of pull factors indicates that displaced 

people do not necessarily follow a certain pattern of migration (or, of displacement), rather 

their settlement strategies have highly depend on various factors. In this section, I have 

tried to explore the important ones. Now, I would like to turn to post-migration situation of 

migrants and the active role of migrants in constructing their identity. 

 

4.3.  Post-migration Situation 

 

In this section, I argue that displacement, although it brings severe challenges and 

difficulties, at the same time also forces people to produce new modes of belonging and to 

change the forms of sociality. Apart from its destructive impacts, displacement can also 

lead to creation of new identities, spaces and narratives.  

 

During my fieldwork, although I had not asked any particular questions on 

discrimination or social clashes between Kurds and Turks, many of my respondents 

frequently mentioned that they believe they have been discriminated on different levels. In 

addition to discrimination in housing and job market, on a level of symbols and language 

(e.g. traditions, customs, clothes, language and different accent) discrimination has 

continued. I would like to argue that discrimination against Kurds has contributed to the 

creation of new modes of belonging and community solidarity. Moreover, shared 

“experience” and “memories” of displacement are also other factors that have reinforced 

feeling of a community by the community members. 

 

52 

 

Encounter of displaced Kurds with other groups (primarily Turks) in big cities 

functions as an important factor in producing a Kurdish identity. As Tarık tells:  

When people came to Istanbul they realized what they are. When you talk, you are 

despised. When you want to rent a place, they do not rent you because you are a Kurd. 

Then, you understand what you are. It becomes clearer for you. (personal communication, 

March 01, 2012) 

 

Tarık states that his Kurdishness has been redefined in the city, as a response to the 

actions of other groups. As discussed in the third chapter, displaced people do not 

necessarily try to integrate into existing social structures. It is an interactive process 

between displaced people and other groups. Nuri supports what Tarık said: “Here, you feel 

yourself like a guest. They always show you that this place doesn’t belong to you. I don’t 

believe anymore when one says brotherhood between Kurds and Turks” (personal 

communication, March 01, 2012). Nuri’s response confirms that “both the displaced and 

the hosts are . . . actively taking part in creating new places and giving new meanings to 

old places” (Brun, 2003, p. 380). Displaced people actively try to re-define their identity 

and the space around them. One could argue that it brings inevitable politicization into the 

daily life of a displaced person. 

 

Displacement as a political instrument employed by the state—in order to mix 

different groups or assimilate a minority group by forcing its members to integrate into the 

majority—can sometimes have unintended consequences, leading to production of 

different modes of identity and belonging.  

 

Treating identity as a phenomenon fixed to territory has again strong references to 

the sedentarist bias in forced migration studies. Being uprooted does not necessarily 

demolish all memories, ties with a place, and affiliation with a certain group of people and 

ethnicity. Rather, it creates new ways of production of identity, i.e. an identity defined as 

 

53 

“an opposite of something else”.32 In the same vein, Stepputat has argued that “identity is 

not necessarily de-territorialized, but rather re-territorialized [emphasis added]” (1999, p. 

418). 

 

In the last two decades, Kurdish movement in Istanbul raised its influence in the 

Turkish politics. Next to Diyarbakır, as a traditional center of Kurds from Turkey, Istanbul 

became one of the most important centers of the Kurdish movement. The contribution that 

internal displacement made in this respect cannot be ignored. Displacement has not only 

forced Kurds to migrate to metropolitan areas, but it has also created a field for interaction 

between Kurds and Turks. As Tarık has argued his interactions with Turks in the city have 

led him to redefine his identity; similar has happened to whole movements.  

 

Moreover, I would like to argue that Kurdish movement in Istanbul, which has 

gained many new (politicized) members as a result of displacement, functions as an 

internal diaspora33 of Kurds in Turkey. Displacement of hundreds of thousands of Kurds 

has contributed to urbanization of Kurdish movement and creation of diaspora-like 

communities. Displacement has changed many individuals’ self-perception of identity or 

“Kurdishness”. It has also contributed to an emergence of a group identity, “urban 

Kurdishness”. In this sense, displacement, despite its all negative aspects, has fostered 

creative action for individuals and the Kurdish movement. I think that organizing Kurdish 

movement in this way would not have been possible without urbanization of Kurds. As 

Colson has argued,  

                                                 
32 It should also be noted that some of my respondents mentioned that there are significant differences among 
Kurds themselves, in terms of their political position and the way they construct their identities. Those who 
have experienced displacement are seen to be more political than those who migrated long ago and integrated 
into  the  big  cities.  For  a  source  that  partly  contains  a  debate  on  different  political  choices  and  attitudes  of 
different Kurdish groups see Yeğen, 2011. 
33 Here I suggest using diaspora concept quite provocatively to acknowledge the role of Kurdish movement 
in  Istanbul  as  an  important  (to  a  certain  extent,  qualitatively  different)  actor  in  Kurdish  politics.  Kurdish 
organizations in Istanbul take an active role in production of policies and negotiation of them (on different 
levels) with other groups. Moreover, Kurdish organizations succeeded in collecting support from non-Kurds. 
Spatial and social segregation of Kurds in the big cities and closed-community features (the most prominent 
is exclusive usage of Kurdish language) are some of the other factors supporting this argument. 

54 

 

[r]esettlement does not wipe out memory, but rather provides a medium through 

which it is reworked, and the memory of shared experience of uprooting helps to 

create new forms of identity. This has consequences, as witness the investment of 

diasporas in independence movements and civil warfare in their homelands. (2003, 

p. 9) 

Production of a political identity and the main features of the Kurdish political movements 

in Istanbul have been significantly influenced by the displacement. Displacement of Kurds 

has led to more interactions of Kurds with other groups on different levels (e.g., urban 

housing markets, job markets, schools etc.). These areas of interaction have impacted the 

re-production of Kurdish identity in the cities. Moreover, as a result of forced mobility of 

people to metropolitan areas, new centers of Kurdish movement are being created, and the 

main features of Kurdish movement have changed (e.g., changes in demands from 

separation to demand for equal citizenship rights and autonomy).  

 

As a final word, displacement of Kurds has not been an unconnected event and it 

should rather be analyzed as an embedded phenomenon within a particular socio-economic 

context of Turkey. Moreover, not only push and pull factors should be considered in 

relation to a particular socio-economic context, but also other aspects (e.g., political 

impacts, and challenges for citizenship regime of the country, legal framework and social 

welfare system) should also be taken into account in our analyses. I believe that such a 

comprehensive approach, covering pre-flight, flight and exile stages, including political 

aspects and citizenship right, would extend the borders of understanding of forced 

migration.   

 

 

 

 

55 

4.4. 

Shifting Between Categories: Selim’s story 

 

Different levels (legal, political and moral/social levels) use different definitions 

and perceptions of displacement. On a legal level, forced migrants (e.g. refugees, asylum-

seekers and IDPs) are expected to prove that they had to leave their places against their 

will, in other words they have to prove that they are vulnerable. For both internally and 

internationally displaced people, the authenticity of the reason that compels someone to 

leave his/her place involuntarily must be proven by different means such as witnesses and 

official papers. 

 

However, on a moral level different dynamics are at play. Stories told are mostly 

depending on with whom and in which context a displaced person (or a person who claims 

he/she has been displaced) talks about his/her displacement experience. On a moral level, 

quite differently than on a legal level, people would prefer to hide their vulnerability. 

Another possibility is that people, by different means, claim that they are vulnerable in 

order to get access to material and emotional support from the community. Moreover, on a 

political level, being forced to leave a place might attract sympathy of other community 

members, as well as of other people. Shared experiences of displacement also contribute to 

the construction of a political narrative.  

 

On different levels and in different contexts,34 being vulnerable has different 

meanings. The legal status acquired by proving to be vulnerable might force people to 

reformulate their community relations. For instance, advancing from a desperate asylum-

seeker to a refugee with certain benefits and access to social services would no doubt 

impact the position of that person in the community. 

 

Using the framework suggested in this study, in this chapter I would like to analyze 

a story of Selim, a displaced Kurd in Turkey. In Selim’s displacement story, it is possible 
                                                 
34 Political  conjecture  of  a  moment  and  place  also  plays  an  important  role  in  how  forced  migrants  are 
welcomed. Political importance and meaning of the refugees from the socialist countries in Western Europe 
during the Cold War and recent asylum seekers from Libya in Italy are apparently different. 

56 

 

to observe different aspects of displacement discussed in the third and fourth chapters, such 

as complexity of causes, and decisive roles of capital and social networks in settlement. 

More interestingly, Selim’s story, although a story of only one person, contains plurality of 

views on and definitions of displacement, as given by different actors, including Selim 

himself. 

 

When I was conducting my first interview with a displaced person, Mehmet, in the 

office of Göç-Der, Selim entered the room. Mehmet told me that I should also interview 

Selim, because he is also, in Mehmet’s words, a “victim” of migration. What Mehmet 

meant by the word “victim” is that Selim had also experienced similar things as other 

displaced people. Selim’s answer was short and clear: “I am not a forced migrant”. 

 

After Mehmet’s interview was over, I asked Selim whether he would like to talk 

about his migration to Istanbul and about the general situation of displaced persons. Some 

aspects of his migration were already analyzed in the fourth chapter. Here, I would like to 

focus primarily on how Selim tells his own story and how he perceives his displacement. 

My family and I migrated from a village of Yüksekova, Hakkari to Van. Actually, 

we could not take the risk of coming to Istanbul. Because, traditions and customs 

are different… At that time, we also didn’t know what we could do in Istanbul . . . 

no relatives, no friends, no acquaintances... suddenly... our ancestors have been 

living in this region maybe for a thousand years and they were making their living 

by doing agriculture and animal husbandry. When we were living in the village, we 

had 600-700 sheep and many registered35 houses. 

Selim’s economic conditions were relatively better than those of other displaced people I 

have interviewed. But after access to the grazing lands were forbidden by the security 

forces, Selim’s economic conditions worsened. However, economic problems were not the 

                                                 
35  It  should  be  noted  that  official  registration  of  houses  becomes  very  important  once  it  comes  to 
compensation for material losses due to the conflict. 

57 

 

only ones he was facing: “. . . no, not only because grazing was forbidden, there were other 

events, attacks and other things... We had to leave and sell our sheep and houses”. By 

“other things” Selim means security concerns. When his family migrated to Van, he had to 

leave for another place for some time: “I went first to Muğla. We had some problems in the 

village. I had to go. I also worked there. But, I didn’t go there for the job.” 

Besides arrestments, village evacuations and violent attacks, there were also other 

strategies of oppression: 

 the state made a kind of classification, this family is good, this family is bad, and 

this one is cooperative. I assume that they put us into the ‘enemy group’. Therefore, 

we always experienced difficulties. For instance, once, security forces came in the 

night, without any official search warrant, entered our place and searched 

everywhere, then they said “Oh, sorry! It is the wrong place, we were supposed to 

go to another house”. That night, my mother broke her arm because she stood up 

suddenly with fear and fell down. We experienced many similar things. 

Increased pressure from the military caused many people to leave their villages. Since 

those people had not been officially displaced by the security forces, one could argue that 

they left their villages voluntarily or due to economic problems. 

-Is your village in the official list of evacuated villages? Could you apply for 

compensation? 

-My brother first made a petition. He wrote that we want to return our village…in 

1998…he received an answer, saying: “You cannot return. Your security of life and 

property cannot be guaranteed and protected”. It is what my brother received. 

State’s response shows that the state has tacitly recognized Selim’s family as displaced 

persons. Although they were not displaced by the military forces, this answer implies that 

they had to leave their village due to the armed conflict and that their return is not possible. 

 

58 

On the legal level, state has recognized their vulnerability in their hometown. This 

recognition can be analyzed as a political instrument employed by the state in order to bar 

people from returning.  

 

However, after the Turkish government introduced the compensation program for 

displaced people, Selim’s brother again applied on the behalf of the family: “My brother 

applied for compensation based on the law No. 5233 and was rejected.”36  This time, is the 

state refused to acknowledge that Selim’s family was displaced due to the conflict. The law 

No. 5233 does not only apply to people who were explicitly displaced by the state, but it 

also applies to all those who left their villages due to the “activities carried out under the 

fight against terrorism” or due to terrorist acts. Rather than giving clear criteria for its 

application, Law No. 5233 lists the categories that cannot apply for the compensation.37 An 

unclear legal definition of who counts as a displaced person in this case makes more 

people eligible for compensation, but at the same time creates an area for the state to act 

differently in similar cases. 

 

Selim thinks that the reason why their application was rejected is that his brother 

has claimed that the family had been compelled to leave due to the pressure by the military 

forces: 

My brother wrote on the petition that we were displaced due to the violence by the 

security forces, not by the PKK. This is the truth. Our application was rejected. We 

                                                 
36  Law  No.5233:  The  Law  on  Compensation  for  Damage  Arising  from  Terror  and  Combating  Terror, 
generally known as Compensation Law. It was enacted on 17.07.2004 and covers the losses in period from 
19.07.1987 (the date OHAL was enacted) until the present moment. According to this law, three groups of 
damages are to be compensated. ”a) All damages given to the animals, trees, - products and other movable 
and immovable properties. b) Damages resulting from injury, physical disability and death and the expenses 
made for medical treatment and funerals. c) Material damages due to the reason that people could not reach 
their assets because of the activities carried out under the fight against terrorism.” For the English translation 
of 
http://www.internal-displacement.org/8025708F004CE90B/%28http 
Documents%29/800AC571E1B555F2C125717100292674/$file/Turkey_CompensationLaw5233.pdf 
37 This law does not apply for compensation of some damages, such as “the damages which occurred due to 
reasons  other  than  terrorism,  such  as  economic  and  social  reasons”;  “damages  which  occurred  due  to 
displacement of persons on their own will”, and “the damages occurred due to deliberate acts of the persons 
themselves.” 

law 

the 

see 

 

59 

have an official document from the city governorship … from the Ministry of 

Interior. They told us not to return. My brother prepared three petitions. He attached 

that document as well. When we ask any lawyer, he/she tells us that the state has 

already accepted that we were displaced and cannot return. 

On the legal level, the state both accepts and refuses to acknowledge that they have been 

displaced. The political importance of acknowledging (or not acknowledging) should 

particularly be emphasized. Distributing compensation to those who were displaced by the 

PKK has been providing the state with legitimacy in its fight against terrorism. Moreover, 

it has also reinforced the image of “paternal state” that protects its citizens against 

insurgent groups, during and after the armed conflict. Claiming that people had to leave 

due to the pressure and violent attacks from the PKK (or at least sharing the responsibility 

of causing displacement with insurgent groups) has therefore strong political meanings. 

Selim tells further: “You make a petition. You say I want to return. The state refuses. Our 

application was rejected. We have appealed to the decision and now we are waiting” He 

thinks that this application will also be rejected. He is even considering bringing his case to 

the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) as many others have done in the past.38 

Selim, who said at the beginning of our conversation is not a forced migrant, on a legal 

level claims that he was forced to leave and even plans to bring the case as far as it could 

go on the level legal level, to the highest possible court, to the European Court of Human 

Rights. 

                                                 
38 There have been many applications by the displaced people before the European Court of Human Rights, 
claiming that their essential rights such as the right to life and right to property have been violated. For two 
example  cases  in  which  Turkey  was  convicted  see  Aktaş  v.  Turkey  (Application  number:  33246/96)  and 
Ağgül and others v. Turkey (Application number: 33324/96).  
After the compensation law was enacted by the government in 2004, applications before the ECtHR have 
been reviewed again. The Court took a test case (Đçyer v. Turkey, application number: 18888/02) and ruled 
that this case and similar cases are inadmissible, because the domestic remedies were not exhausted by the 
applicants. For a press release and summary of the decision see 
https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=964609&Site=COE. In the light of these developments, Selim’s 
application could also be rejected or take very long time. However, despite the difficulties, Selim’s will to 
bring the case shows us his determination on his claim that, at least on a legal level, he is a forced migrant,.    

60 

 

the state set up another trap there [in compensation process]. If you say your village 

was burned or attacked by the “others” [the PKK]... For instance, a farmer family, a 

father who is illiterate goes to a lawyer...tells his house was burned by soldiers. 

Lawyer thinks if he or she can win the case, what would be the amount of the 

compensation. Lawyer thinks of his or her 10% commission.  Thus, he or she adds 

a sentence: “...displaced due to ‘terrorism’”. Then state says ok and pays the 

compensation. If you tell the story as it happened, it is very difficult. They ask for 

proof, electricity bill etc. People left everything there! 

Being displaced apart from its social, cultural and economic aspects is a political issue, 

both for the state and for the displaced people. One could argue that accusing the PKK 

instead of the state can bring material benefits, i.e. money compensation. However, it could 

also harm relations with other community members. 

 

Applications by the displaced people and acceptances/rejections by the state can be 

seen as political strategies. Insisting that they have involuntarily left their villages due to 

the military/state (not “terrorism” or the PKK) is for Kurds a political act. Therefore, very 

material aspect of displacement—material compensation for losses—turns into an area of 

struggle or an extension of the conflict. This state policy makes Kurds vulnerable, because 

they have to choose between ideology and community on one hand, and material benefits 

on the other, and for that reason they refuse protection by the state, because it comes with a 

price.  

 

Being displaced by the state provides people with more access to material and 

emotional support by the other community members. Therefore, it can be seen as an 

important factor in community making. In order to gain assistance and “sympathy” from 

the community members, displaced people actively try to prove that they were vulnerable 

or that they were displaced by the same actors as the others. In this sense proving 

 

61 

vulnerability does not only provide one with the legal benefits, but it also brings a status in 

the social sphere. Below, we shall see how vulnerability is reformulated in different 

contexts, for example inside the community it positions itself on the scale of “moral 

hierarchy of suffering”, whereas outside the community not claiming to be vulnerable can 

be a matter of pride.  

 

Before that I would like to take a look at another point in Selim’s story. After Selim 

told how their application was rejected, he said: “Actually, we came to Istanbul due to 

economic reasons, in 1995.” Selim’s perception of his own situation has changed “on the 

way”, during his migration. When he was telling about his migration from Hakkari to Van, 

he frequently used the words “forced” and “had to”, whereas he defines his migration from 

Van to Istanbul as a migration out of economic reasons: they spent what they brought from 

the village in one and a half years, and needed to find a job in another city.  That brings 

two questions forward: Is it really possible to distinguish economic migrants form forced 

migrants and when does displacement end?39  

 

Looking from the perspective of the state, Selim was first treated as a displaced 

person. Then, when his application was rejected, he was treated as a voluntary migrant and 

there was therefore no need to compensate any loss. On the other hand, Selim’s 

interpretation is that, on a legal level, he has always been a forced migrant. From the very 

beginning he and his family claimed that they were forced to leave. However, on a moral 

level, things get much more complex. Let me turn to moral level and explain what I meant 

by the significant differences between the criteria used in legal, political and moral/social 

levels, by using an example from Selim’s story. 

 

On a moral/social level, categories that are used when migrants talk about their 

migration imply another set of meanings and social norms. Different vocabulary (pride, 

                                                 
39 This  question  has  also  been  asked  by  several  scholars.  For  a  discussion  on  different  approaches  (cause-
based criteria, solution-based criteria and needs-based criteria) see Mooney 2003. 

62 

 

shame, weakness, strength, status etc.) is used. In contrast to objective criteria of legal 

categorizations, on a moral level self-perceptions, as well as interpretation by the other 

members of the community, are highly context-bound and inevitably subjective. 

Methodologically, it is still possible to conduct a research on forced migrants by looking at 

their interpretations and what all these interpretations mean in particular context of a 

community. 

 

Selim makes a strong comparison of his situation with the others those who have 

had worse displacement experiences: 

-Frankly, we experienced many things. Mehmet just said I am a victim of migration 

and told me to tell my story. I feel ashamed to tell. When I look back, at other 

people, what happened to us is nothing. 

 -But, isn’t it a type of pressure? You just told that you had to leave your place, had 

to sell everything you have. 

-Yes, now there is no car, no money. But what I mean is something different. What 

we lost is nothing when I compare it to what happened to other people ... All 

inhuman things. Ok, what they did to us is also inhuman. It is unlawful, I don’t 

even discuss it. But when I compare it with other people, it is nothing… people lost 

their lives, family members… 

When Selim compares his experiences of displacement to those of his fellowmen, he 

locates himself in the bottom section of the “hierarchy of suffering”. Although he 

decidedly defined himself as a forced migrant in the legal process, when talking about his 

experience, Selim feels ashamed and positions himself into “relatively-less-suffered” 

group.  

 

63 

 

Meaning of being vulnerable is thus being reformulated in different contexts.40 In 

other words, depending on the context, someone who lost a family member could be 

considered a forced migrant as much as someone who had economic problems (e.g., lost 

property) due to the conflict, while on a different level (moral/social), those two 

individuals could not be treated as members of the same group. Therefore there are two 

different logics used when defining a forced migrant. The first one deals with legal 

categories and makes distinction between political migrants (refuges, “deserving victims”), 

and economic migrants (sometimes defined also as “fake asylum seekers”). The other logic 

operates with moral aspects i.e. how migrants define and understand themselves as 

individuals and as part of community of other migrants. The problem is that these two 

ways of categorization do not have to match—and most of the time they do not. Therefore 

it is crucial to include elements of the second approach into the first and thus contribute to 

making better polices and more flexible analytical categories in forced migration studies.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
40 One  example  of  this  hierarchy  would  be  that  we  put  physical  attacks  and  murders  to  the  top  and  non-
violent, economic problems to the bottom of acceptable reasons for claiming asylum. 

64 

 

5. 

COҭCLUSIOҭ 

 

 

The main purpose of this study was to respond to two working hypotheses that 

were presented in the Introduction. I have first made a conceptual discussion on forced 

migration in order to examine the first hypothesis. The aim was to explore the main 

arguments that are present in the forced migration literature. Here, I would like to briefly 

conclude the theoretical debate; afterwards I will turn to the second hypothesis and the 

empirical findings of the fieldwork research. 

 

In the third chapter, for purpose of my analysis I divided forced migration literature 

into two different groups, the conventional narrative and the critical approach. In order to 

highlight the differences between the two approaches, I suggested analyzing different 

arguments that they made on the same issues (e.g. importance of push and pull factors in 

decision making, the distinctions—or (im)possibility of making distinctions—between 

voluntary and involuntary migration, and the temporal phases of displacement). 

In the conventional forced migration narrative, the decisive role of the push factors (that 

are mostly reduced to a narrow choice, for instance armed conflict) figures more 

prominently. On the other hand, the critical approach to forced migration suggests steering 

our focus to “pull factors”, without ignoring the role of “push factors”. It attempts to make 

pull factors more visible in the forced migration literature, by acknowledging the whole 

complexity of socio-economic context behind the displacement.  

 

Looking at pull factors inevitably leads to recognition of displaced people as 

purposive actors that interact with other people, and try to influence the dynamics around. 

This understanding of forced migrants acknowledges their active role in their own stories, 

instead of depicting them only as passive victims of unexpected emergencies. One could 

argue here that there is a challenge—both ethical and methodological—that needs to be 

 

65 

overcome. That is, that there is a risk of overestimating the existence of actual options 

among which the migrant is to chose, especially since the alternatives may be very limited, 

or non existing for some of the forced migrants. Identifying a group of displaced people 

who have had very limited options with another group of displaced people who have had 

relatively better opportunities and options during their flight runs the risk of generalization 

of the assumption that forced migrants do have actually options under every circumstances.  

 

I believe that the particular emphasis on the “relations” and their interpretations in 

the critical approach largely overcomes this challenge, because an analysis of relations 

presupposes locating the displacement into a particular spatial, temporal and a socio-

economic context, before assigning these relations a meaning. Unlike the globally valid 

legal definitions, the critical approach suggests more context-related, flexible and 

analytical categories. Therefore, instead of assuming that “there are always options for 

forced migrants”, in the critical approach this argument would be reformulated into that the 

options are dependent on numerous factors, not only on the disposing factors and causes of 

the displacement, but also on the migrant´s ability, social networks, capitals, political 

conjunctures, socio-economic context and so on. Combination of different factors in a 

particular time and space creates a range of options (wide or very narrow) for each 

individual.  

 

As a last word for the conceptual debate, analytical categorization of forced 

migration recognizes the “voices” of migrants, instead of using the language of others who 

talk about displaced persons as a homogenous group of people. In that respect, in order to 

hear the voices of displaced people in the analysis, empirical data collection becomes 

crucial. Theoretical debate must be supported by empirical data in order to be able to 

observe the role of different factors in displacement, but also to construct a different 

understanding on forced migration that could help diagnose the difficulties faced by 

 

66 

displaced people (e.g. discrimination in the cities) and produce better policies for 

assistance (e.g. better access to social welfare and citizenship rights) 

 

The research findings were presented in the fourth chapter. Here I would like to 

briefly review the important empirical findings.  

 

The causes of displacement (or the “push factors”) were very diverse for the 

displaced persons I interviewed. Although the main reason for displacement was the armed 

conflict, each of my respondents has experienced the outcomes of the conflict differently. 

While some families were faced with direct violence and lost a family member during the 

conflict (e.g. Tahsin, Fatma and Muzaffer), for the others conflict-caused economic 

problems and general insecurity in the region were the main reasons to leave (e.g., Rıza 

and Đhsan). 

 

Several further factors played an important role in flight and exile stages. Social 

networks and various kinds of capitals appear as the main determinants of migrants´ choice 

of destination. Depending on their capitals and connections, people choose different routes. 

The ones who could afford it, or who had relatives in Istanbul, directly migrated to this city 

and stayed there (e.g., Đsmail, Tarık), while others migrated to other cities before reaching 

their current destination, depending again on their personal connections in those places 

(e.g., Hasan). 

 

Displaced Kurds have not always created a totally new ways and patterns of 

migration. Usually they integrated into the existing rural-urban (East-West) migration in 

Turkey. Therefore, as discussed above, some strategies employed by the displaced families 

have strong similarities with chain migration. For instance, Muzaffer had sent his children 

to Istanbul to find jobs and accommodation, and thus create a safe base for the rest of the 

family to arrive; in the meantime the other family members stayed at their relatives in a 

 

67 

city closer to their hometown. Depending on the connections in the cities, displaced people 

do make choices among possible locations (e.g. Hasan) 

 

In this study, the transformative role of the displaced people was also mentioned. 

First of all, as the fieldwork data have shown us, displaced people actively try to influence 

the conditions they found themselves in, thus proving their “ordinariness”, in Turton´s 

terms. Displaced people, as other people, depending on the conditions calculate, anticipate 

and actively build their own lives. Some examples of these attempts were provided in the 

fifth chapter (e.g. Nuri, Hasan and Đhsan).  

 

Secondly, displaced people transform different types of capitals they have into 

other kinds. In Nuri’s story, we have seen an example of this transformation from two 

different perspectives. Nuri has first received a job and a shelter in exchange to his labor 

power and “loyalty”. Later, after he had settled, the framework of reciprocity has been 

reformulated and Nuri could get access to economic capital in exchange to his social 

capital. 

 

Displacement of Kurds has also made lasting impacts on broader socio-economic 

and political contexts in Turkey. Although the main aim of the state in forced migration 

was to root out support for PKK in the East, the consequences went much further than 

intended. Forced migration has no doubt contributed to the urbanization of Kurdish 

movement and creation of new influential centers (most prominently Istanbul) of Kurdish 

politics. In the fifth chapter, I have argued that displacement has created diaspora-like 

communities (or internal diaspora) of Kurds in Turkey. There is obvious need for more 

empirical data to measure the differences among Kurdish community in terms of political 

positions and identity, and the impacts of displacement on urbanized Kurdishness. 

 

The last point I would like to highlight is that the self-perceptions of migrants and 

the language they use when talking about their migration are highly dependent on the level 

 

68 

(moral/social, legal and political) on which they present themselves. Differently from the 

claim for objectivity on the legal level and in policy-making categorization, on a 

moral/social level different dynamics are at play. Being vulnerable, or presenting oneself 

as a victim, may either provide one with material and emotional support or may have moral 

costs for a migrant. In the last section of the fourth chapter, I tried to illustrate the diversity 

of perceptions in the case of Selim. Moral side of displacement and its effects on the 

community dynamics have been largely neglected in the forced migration literature. 

Looking at how displaced people interpret their own situations can also open a new area 

for scientific analysis and might shed light on how above mentioned factors (social capital, 

networks etc.) have been mobilized by the forced migrants.  

 

Finally, it would be interesting in the future to conduct a research on the impacts 

that the displacement of Kurds had had on the economical development in the receiving 

metropolitan areas. I believe that a comprehensive ethnographic research on the changing 

economic activity of Kurds in urban areas—in other words their proletarianization—would 

immensely contribute to the understanding of the “economic boom” Turkey underwent in 

recent years. It would also provide more information on the changing labor conditions in 

Turkey. 

 

Another research project would be to investigate the role of different ties and 

capitals in migration decisions of the displaced Kurds, by doing a comparative study of 

three different groups: (1) Kurds who stayed in Turkey after being displaced; (2) Kurds 

who immigrated to another countries (either as asylum seekers or through different means) 

and (3) Kurds who decided to stay in the East despite the violence and general security in 

the region. Comparison of these groups of Kurds would contribute to the critical literature 

on forced migration and illustrate the importance of the presence (or lack) of “pull factors” 

in choice of destination and in settlement strategies. Moreover, it could also explore the 

 

69 

different requirements for proving vulnerability on different levels and as well as moral 

side of displacement.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

70 

REFEREҭCES 

 

Appadurai, A. (1992). Putting hierarchy in its place. In G.E. Marcus (Ed.), Rereading 

cultural anthropology (pp. 34-47). Durham: Duke University Press. 

Assal, M. (2006). Do they have a choice? Factors pulling Somalis to Norway. Published 

online: (www.landinfo.no/asset/507/1/507_1.pdf) 

Ayata, B., & Yükseker, D. (2005). A belated awakening: National and international 

responses to the internal displacement of Kurds in Turkey. ̱ew Perspectives on 

Turkey, 32(1), 5-42. Retrieved from http://home.ku.edu.tr/~dyukseker/ayata-

yukseker-NPT.pdf 

Aysa-Lastra, M. (2011). Integration of internally displaced persons in urban labour 

markets: a case study of the IDP population in Soacha, Colombia. Journal of Refugee 

Studies, 24(2), 277-303. doi:10.1093/jrs/feq054 

Bakewell, O. (2008). Research beyond the categories: The importance of policy irrelevant 

research into forced migration. Journal of Refugee Studies, 21(4), 432-453. 

doi:10.1093/jrs/fen042 

Ballance, E. O. (1996). The Kurdish struggle. London: Macmillian Press. 

Barut, M. (2001). Zorunlu göçe maruz kalan Kürt kökenli T.C. vatandaşlarının göç öncesi 

ve göç sonrası sosyo ekonomik, sosyo kültürel durumları, askeri çatışma ve gerginlik 

politikaları sonucu meydana gelen göçün ortaya çıkardığı sorunlar ve göç mağduru 

ailelerin geriye dönüş eğilimlerinin araştırılması ve çözüm önerileri. Istanbul: Göç-

Der. Retrieved from 

http://www.akdenizgocder.org/raporlar/992001MBarutraporu.doc 

 

 

71 

Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. Richardson (Ed.). Handbook of theory and 

research for the sociology of education. Ed J Richardson. New York: Greenwood 

Press. 

Bourdieu, P. & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992). An invitation to reflexive sociology. Cambridge: 

Polity Press. 

Brun, C. (2003). Local citizens or internally displaced persons? Dilemmas of long term 

displacement in Sri Lanka. Journal of Refugee Studies, 16(4), 376-397. 

doi:10.1093/jrs/16.4.376 

Castles, S. (2003). Towards a sociology of forced migration and social transformation. 

Sociology, 37(1), 13-34. doi:10.1177/0038038503037001384 

Cohen, R., & Deng F. M. (1998). Masses in flight: The global crisis of internal 

displacement. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution. 

Coleman, J. S. (1988).  Social capital in the creation of human capital. American Journal of 

Sociology, 94, 95-120. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2780243 

Çiller PKK’yı helikopterlendirdi (1994, October 28). Cumhuriyet. p. 5. Retrieved from 

http://www.cumhuriyetarsivi.com/monitor/index.xhtml 

Colson, E. (2003). Forced Migration and the Anthropological Response. Journal of 

Refugee Studies, 16(1), 1-18. doi:10.1093/jrs/16.1.1 

Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987) A Thousand plateaus: Capitalism and schizophrenia. 

Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

DeWind, J. (2007). Response to Hathaway. Journal of Refugee Studies, 20(3), 381-385. 

doi:10.1093/jrs/fem022 

Erder, S. (1999) Where do you hail from?: Localism and networks in Istanbul. In Ç. 

Keyder (Ed.), Istanbul (pp. 161-173). Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers 

 

72 

Flew, A. 1971. An introduction to western philosophy: Ideas and argument from Plato to 

Sartre. London: Thames and Hudson. 

Göç Edenler Sosyal Yardımlasma ve Kültür Derneği (Göç-Der). (2008). Stories of 

migration. Istanbul: Göç-Der. 

 Göç Edenler Sosyal Yardımlasma ve Kültür Derneği (Göç-Der). (2011). Zorla yerinden 

edilenler için ekonomik,sosyal ve kültürel haklar araştırma raporu. Istanbul: Göç-

Der. Retrieved from 

http://www.ihop.org.tr/dosya/diger/goc_rapor_20_haziran_2011.pdf 

Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 

78(6), 1360-1380. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776392 

Hacettepe Üniversitesi Nüfus Etüdleri Enstitüsü (HÜNEE). (2006). Türkiye göç ve 

yerinden olmuş nüfus araştırması raporu. Ankara: HÜNEE. Retrieved from 

http://www.hips.hacettepe.edu.tr/tgyona/TGYONA_rapor.pdf 

Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC). (2011). Global overview 2011: People 

internally displaced by conflict and violence. Retrieved from http://www.internal-

displacement.org/publications/global-overview-2011.pdf 

Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC). (2009). ̱eed for continued 

improvement in response to protracted displacement: A profile of the internal 

displacement situation. Retrieved from http://www.internal-

displacement.org/8025708F004BE3B1/%28httpInfoFiles%29/7EDA8C99541018EA

C125765B002E188D/$file/Turkey_Overview_Oct09.pdf 

Keser, Đ. (2011). Göç ve zor. Ankara: Ütopya Yayınevi.  

Koser, K. (1997). Social Networks and the Asylum Cycle : The Case of Iranians in the 

Netherlands. International Migration Review, 31(3), 591-611. Retrieved from 

http://www.jstor.org/stable/2547287 

 

73 

Kunz, E. F. (1973). The refugee in flight: Kinetic models and forms of displacement. 

International Migration Review, 7(2), 125-146. doi:10.2307/3002424 

Kunz, E. F. (1981). Exile and resettlement: Refugee theory. International Migration 

Review, 15(1/2), 42. doi:10.2307/2545323 

Magaramombe, G. (2010). “Displaced in place”: Agrarian displacements, replacements 

and resettlement among farm workers in Mazowe district. Journal of Southern 

African Studies, 36(2), 361-375. doi:10.1080/03057070.2010.485789 

Malkki, L. (1992). National geographic: The rooting of peoples and the territorialization of 

national identity among scholars and refugees. Cultural Anthropology, 7(1), 24-44. 

doi:10.1525/can.1992.7.1.02a00030 

Malkki, L. (1995). Refugees and exile : from “refugee studies” to the national order of 

things. Annual Review of Anthropology, 24, 495-523. Retrieved from 

http://www.jstor.org/stable/2155947 

Marx, E. (1990). The Social World of Refugees: A Conceptual Framework. Journal of 

Refugee Studies, 3(3), 189-203. doi:10.1093/jrs/3.3.189 

Massey, D. S., Arrango, J., Hugo, G., Kouaouci, A., Pellegrino, A. and Taylor, J. E. 

(1993). Theories of international migration: A review and appraisal. Population and 

Development Review 19(3), pp. 431-66. Retrieved from 

www.jstor.org/stable/2938462 

McDowall, D. (2004). A modern history of the Kurds. New York: I.B. Tauris.  

McKay, S. (2009). Commonalities of experience. In S. McKay (Ed.) Refugees, recent 

migrants and employment : Challenging barriers and exploring pathways (pp. 11-

22) . New York: Routledge. 

Mooney, E. (2003, February). When does internal displacement end? Paper Presented at 

the Conference on Researching Internal Displacement: State of the Art, Trondheim, 

 

74 

Norway. Retrieved from 

http://www.idp.ntnu.no/Register/UpLoadFiles/mooney20.pdf 

Mooney, E. (2005). The Concept of Internal Displacement and the Case for Internally 

Displaced Persons as a Category of Concern. Refugee Survey Quarterly, 24(3), 9-26. 

doi:10.1093/rsq/hdi049 

Nyberg-Sorensen. N., N. Van Hear, P. Engberg-Pedersen (2002). The migration-

development nexus: evidence and policy options, IOM. 

Oliver-Smith, A. (1991). Involuntary resettlement, resistance and political empowerment. 

Journal of Refugee Studies, 4(2), 132-149. doi:10.1093/jrs/4.2.132 

Papadopoulou, A. (2002, September). Kurdish asylum seekers in Greece: The role of 

networks in the migration process. Paper presented a the UNU/WIDER Conference 

on Poverty, International Migraiton and Asylum, Helsinki, Finland. Retrieved from 

http://www.antigone.gr/en/library/files/selected_publications/greece/Kurdish_Asylu

m_Seekers_in_Greece.pdf   

Patirage, J., & Collyer, M. (2011). Capitalizing social networks: Sri Lankan migration to 

Italy. Ethnography 12(3), 315-333.doi: 10.1177/1466138110362013 

Perinçek, M. (n.d.). Köy koruculuğu uygulamasının zorunlu göç mağdurlarının güvenliği 

açısından yarattığı sorunlar. Retrieved from: 

http://www.ihd.org.tr/index.php?view=article&catid=47%3Amakaleler&id=1022%3

Akoy-koruculugu-uygulamasinin-zorunlu-goc-magdurlarinin-guvenligi-acisindan-

yarattigi-sorunlar&format=pdf&option=com_content&Itemid=125  

Portes, A. (1998). Social capital: Its origins and applications in modern sociology. Annual 

Review of Sociology, 24, 1-24. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/223472 

 

75 

Pratt, A., & Valverde, M. (2002). From deserving victims to “masters of confusion”: 

Redefining refugees in the 1990s. The Canadian Journal of Sociology, 27(2), 135-

161. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/3341708 

Richmond, A. H. (1993). Reactive Migration: Sociological Perspectives On Refugee 

Movements. Journal of Refugee Studies, 6(1), 7-24. doi:10.1093/jrs/6.1.7 

Roque, S. (2008). Manuela: A social biography of war displacement and change in Angola. 

Journal of Contemporary African Studies, 26(4), 371-384. 

doi:10.1080/02589000802481957 

Sen, A. (1999). Development as freedom. New York: Random House. 

Sjaastad, L. A. (1962). The costs and benefits of human migration, Journal of Political 

Economy, 70, 80-93. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/1829105 

Sorensen, B. R. (1997). The experience of displacement. In K. F. Olwig & K. Hastrup 

(Eds.), Siting culture: The shifting anthropological object (pp.142-164). London, 

New York: Routledge. 

Sorensen, B. R. (2003, February). Anthropological contributions to forced migration 

studies: Critical analysis and ethnography, Paper Presented at the Conference on 

Researching Internal Displacement: State of the Art, Trondheim, Norway. Retrieved 

from http://www.idp.ntnu.no/Register/UpLoadFiles/sorensen2003.pdf 

Stein, B. N. (1981). The Refugee Experience: Defining the Parameters of a Field of Study. 

International Migration Review, 15(1/2), 320. doi:10.2307/2545346 

Stepputat, F. (1999). Dead Horses? Journal of Refugee Studies, 12(4), 416-419. doi: 

10.1093/jrs/12.4.416 

T.B.M.M. Tutanak Dergisi (1998). Doğu ve Güneydoğu Anadolu’da Boşaltılan Yerleşim 

Birimleri ̱edeniyle Göç Eden Yurttaşlarımızın Sorunlarının Araştırılarak Alınması 

Gereken Tedbirlerin Tespit Edilmesi Amacıyla Kurulan Meclis Araştırma Komisyonu 

 

76 

Raporu. 53 (Term 20) (June 02). Retrieved from 

http://www.tbmm.gov.tr/sirasayi/donem20/yil01/ss532.pdf 

The Law on Compensation for Damage Arising from Terror and Combating Terror (Law 

No: 5233) (2004). Retrieved from http://www.internal-

displacement.org/8025708F004CE90B/%28httpDocuments%29/800AC571E1B555F

2C125717100292674/$file/Turkey_CompensationLaw5233.pdf 

Turton, D. (2003). Conceptualising forced migration. RSC Working Paper 12. Refugee 

Studies Centre: University of Oxford. Retrieved from 

http://www.rsc.ox.ac.uk/publications/working-papers-

folder_contents/RSCworkingpaper12.pdf 

Turton, D. (2006). Who is a forced migrant? In C. de Wet (Ed.), Devlopemen-induced 

displacement: Problems, policies and people (pp. 13-37). New York: Berghahn 

Books.  

United Nations (UN). (1951). Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees: Retrieved 

from http://www.unhcr.org.tr/docs/sozlesme.pdf 

United Nations (UN). (2005). Ülke Đçinde Yerinden Olma Konusunda Yol Gösterici Đlkeler 

[Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, Explanatory Notes]. Brookings 

Institution, Washington, D.C., 23 August: Retrieved from 

http://www.brookings.edu/fp/projects/idp/AnnotationsTurkish.pdf 

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). (2010) Statistical Books. 

Retrieved from http://www.unhcr.org/4ef9cc9c9.html 

U.S. Committee for Refugees (USCR). (1999). The wall of denial: Internal displacement 

in Turkey. Washington D.C. Retrieved from 

http://www.scribd.com/doc/61374241/The-Wall-of-Denial-Internal-Displacement-in-

Turkey-Bill-Frelick-December-1999 

 

77 

Van Hear, N. (1998) ̱ew diasporas: The mass exodus, dispersal and regrouping of 

migrant communities. Seattle: University of Washington Press. 

Van Hear, N. (2004) ‘I went as far as my money would take me’: conflict, forced migration 

and class. Working paper 6. Oxford: COMPAS. Retrieved from  

http://www.compas.ox.ac.uk/publications/ Working%20papers/WP0406.pdf  

Wood, G. (1985). The Ppolitics of development policy labelling. Development and 

Change, 16(3), 347-373. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7660.1985.tb00214.x 

Yeğen, M. (2011). Son Kürt isyanı. Istanbul: Đletişim Yayınları. 

Yilmaz, B., (2003). Coping with the metropolis: Forced migrants in Istanbul. In 

Researching internal displacement: State of the art. Conference report, Trondheim, 

Norway. Retrieved from http://www.fmreview.org/FMRpdfs/Supplements/TrondheimConf.pdf 

 Yükseker, D. (2006) Severed from their homeland and livelihoods: The internal 

displacement of Kurds in Turkey as a process of social exclusion. In F. Adaman & Ç. 

Keyder (Eds.) Poverty and social exclusion in the slum areas of large cities in 

Turkey, Report for the European Commission, Employment, Social Affairs and 

Equal Opportunities DG, Brussels. Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/employment_social/ 

 

social_inclusion/docs/2006/study_turkey_en.pdf 

 Yükseker D.,& Kurban D., (2009). Permanent solution to internal displacement? An 

assessment of the Van action plan for IDPs, Istanbul: TESEV Publications. 

Zetter, R. (1991). Labelling refugees: Forming and transforming a bureaucratic identity. 

Journal of Refugee Studies, 4(1), 39-62. doi:10.1093/jrs/4.1.39 

 

 

78 

