 

 

 

 

 

THE  THREE  WORLDS  OF  GOVERN-
ANCE 

 

Arguments for a Parsimonious Theory of Quality of Government 

 

BO ROTHSTEIN 

 

 

 

 

 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 2013:12 
 
QOG THE QUALITY OF GOVERNMENT INSTITUTE 
Department of Political Science 
University of Gothenburg 
Box 711, SE 405 30 GÖTEBORG 
August 2013 
ISSN 1653-8919 
© 2013 by Bo Rothstein. All rights reserved. 
 

The Three Worlds of  Governance: Arguments for a Parsimonious Theory of Quality of Govern-
ment 
Bo Rothstein 
QoG Working Paper Series 2013:12 
August 2013 
ISSN 1653-8919 
 

 

ABSTRACT 

 
It is necessary to conceptualize and provide better measures of good governance because in con-
trast to democratization, empirical studies show that it has strong positive effects on measures of 
human well-being, social trust, life satisfaction, peace and political legitimacy. A central problem is 
that  the  term  “governance”  is  conceptualized  differently  in  three  main  approaches to  governance 
which  has  led  to  much  confusion. To  avoid  this, the  term  quality of government  (QoG)  is  preferred. 
This paper argues for a parsimonious conceptualization of QoG built the “Rawls-Machiavelli pro-
gramme”.  This  is  a  combination  of  the  Rawlsian  understanding  of  what  should  be  seen  as  a  just 
political order and the empirical strategy used by Machiavelli stating what is possible to implement. 
It is argued that complex definitions are impossible to operationalize and that such a strategy would 
leave  political  science  without  a  proper  conceptualization  as  well  as  measures  of  the  part  of  the 
state that is most important for humans’ well-being and political legitimacy.  The theory proposed is 
that impartiality in the exercise of public power should be the basic norm for how QoG should be 
defined. The advantage with this strategy is that it does not include in the definition of QoG what 
we want to explain (efficiency, prosperity, administrative capacity and other “good outcomes”) and 
that  recent  empirical research  shows that  this theory  can  be  operationalized  and  used  to  measure 
QoG in ways that have the predicted outcomes.    
 
 
 
 

Bo Rothstein 
The Quality of Government Institute 
Department of Political Science 
University of Gothenburg 
Bo.Rothstein@pol.gu.se 
 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

Conceptualizing Good Governance: Why is this exercise necessary? 

Why  it  a  discussion  about  how  to  theorize,  define  and  measure  “good  governance”,  “quality  of 

government” and/or “state capacity” necessary? Political scientists and especially their compatriots 

the political philosophers are known to spend endless amounts of energy on conceptual issues. Just 

think about the infinite debates on how to define justice, power, rationality, discrimination, ethnici-

ty and social class to name a few. For “governance” two large handbooks have recently been pub-

lished which together contain no less than 1200 pages (Bevir 2010b; Levi-Faur 2012b).  Add to this 

a number of widely cited books and articles and one could ask if enough is not enough. 

My  argument  for  why  it  is  important  to  continue  this  debate  is  basically  empirical  and  has  to  do 

with two unexpected and for many, including this author, also normatively unwelcome results. The 

first  is  about  the  effects  of  democratization.  The  waves  of  democracy  that  have  swept  over  the 

globe have brought representative democracy to places where it seemed inconceivable fifty, thirty 

or even ten years ago. More countries than ever are now by the most sophisticated measures used 

classified as being democratic and more people than ever live in democracies (Teorell 2010). This is 

certainly  something  to  celebrate  but  there  are  also  reasons  to  be  disappointed.  One  example  is 

South  Africa  that  miraculously  managed  to  end  apartheid  in  1994  without  falling  into  a  full  scale 

civil war. As Nelson Mandela said in one of his speeches, the introduction of democracy would not 

only  liberate  people  but  also  greatly  improve  their  social  and  economic  situation  (Mandela  1994, 

414). Available statistics gives a surprising bleak picture for this promise. Since 1994, the country 

has  not  managed  to  improve  the  time  children  on  average  go  to  school  with  one  single  month. 

Economic  inequality  remains  at  a  world  record  level,  life-expectancy  is  down  by  almost  six  years 

and the number of women that die when they give birth has more than doubled.1 Simply put, for 

many central measures of human well-being, the South African democracy has not delivered. An-

other example has been provided by Amartya Sen in an article comparing “quality of live” in China 

and  India.  His  disappointing  conclusion  is  that  on  most  standard  measures  of  human  well-being, 

communist-autocratic Peoples’  Republic  of  China now clearly  outperforms  liberal  and  democrati-

cally governed India (Sen 2011). Using detailed data about child deprivation including a set of thirty 

standard  measures  of  national  levels  of  human  well-being  and  also  some  variables  known  to  be 

                                                      

1 Data from the Quality of Government Data Bank, www.qog.pol.g.u.se 
 

 

3 

related to human well-being such as capacity for taxation, and including from between 75 and 169 

countries, Holmberg and Rothstein (2011) find only weak, or no, or sometimes even negative, cor-

relations between these standard measures of human well-being and the level of democracy as de-

fined above. Maybe the most compelling evidence about the lack of positive effects of democracy 

on human well-being comes from a recent study about child deprivation by Halleröd et. al. (2013) 

using data measuring seven aspects of child poverty from 68 low and middle income countries for 

no less than 2,120,734 cases (children). The result of this large study shows that there is no positive 

effect of democracy on the level of child deprivation for any of the seven indicators (access to safe 

water, food, sanitation, shelter, education, health care and information).  

This bleak picture of the effect of democratization on prosperity and other aspects of human well-

being is confirmed by many other studies (Doucouliagos and Ulubasoglu 2008), (Norris 2012). In 

sum,  the  picture  that  comes  out  of  available  measures  is  this:  Representative  democracy  is  not  a 

safe cure against severe poverty, child deprivation, economic inequality, illiteracy, being unhappy or 

not satisfied with one’s life, infant mortality, short life-expectancy, maternal mortality, access to safe 

water or sanitation, gender inequality, low school attendance for girls, low interpersonal trust or low 

trust in Parliament. Why is this so? One explanation was given by Larry Diamond in a paper pre-

sented  when  the  National Endowment for Democracy in the United States celebrated  its  first  twenty-five 

years of operations: 

There  is  a  specter  haunting  democracy  in  the  world  today.  It  is  bad 

governance—governance that serves only the interests of a narrow rul-

ing  elite.  Governance  that  is  drenched  in  corruption,  patronage,  fa-

vouritism, and abuse of power. Governance that is not responding to 

the massive and long-deferred social agenda of reducing inequality and 

unemployment  and  fighting  against  dehumanizing  poverty.  Govern-

ance that is not delivering broad improvement in people’s lives because 

it is stealing, squandering, or skewing the available resources (Diamond 

2007, 19).  

If  we  follow  Diamond  and  instead  of  focusing  on  representative  democracy  turn  to  measures  of 

state  capacity  (SC),  quality  of  government  (QoG)  or  good  governance  (GG),  the  picture  of  what 

politics  can  do  for  human  well-being  changes  dramatically.  For  example,  the  above  mentioned 

 

4 

study on child deprivation finds strong effects from measures of quality of government on four out 

of seven indicators on child deprivation (lack of safe water, malnutrition, lack of access to health 

care, and lack of access to information) controlling for GDP per capita and a number of basic indi-

vidual level variables (Halleröd et al 2013).  Other studies largely confirm that various measures of 

state capacity, quality of government and good governance have strong effects on almost all stand-

ard  measures  of  human  well-being,  including  subjective  measures  of  life  satisfaction  (aka  “happi-

ness) and social trust (Norris 2012; Holmberg and Rothstein 2012; Ott 2010; Rothstein and Stolle 

2008).  Recent studies also find that absence of violence in the form of interstate and civil wars are 

strongly affected by measures of quality of government and more so than by the level of democracy 

(Lapuente and Rothstein 2014; Norris 2012) 

Some  may  argue  that  the  normative  reasons  for  representative  democracy  should  not  be  perfor-

mance measures like the ones mentioned above, but political legitimacy. If people have the right to 

change their government through “free and fair elections”, they will find their system of rule legiti-

mate (Rothstein 2009). Here comes maybe an even bigger surprise from empirical research, namely 

that democratic rights seem not to be the most important cause behind people’s perception of po-

litical legitimacy (Gilley 2009, 2006). Based on comparative survey data, several recent studies show 

that “performance” or “output” measures such as control of corruption, government effectiveness 

and the rule of law trumps democratic rights in explaining political legitimacy (Gilley 2009; Gjefsen 

2012).  As  stated  by  Bruce  Gilley,  “this  clashes  with  standard  liberal  treatments  of  legitimacy  that 

give overall priority to democratic rights” (2006:58).  

Thus, if the relevance of research in political science is understood in how it may improve human 

well-being and/or improve political legitimacy, political scientists have to a large extent been focus-

ing on the least important part of the political system, namely how the access to power is organized 

(that is, electoral and representative democracy and democratization),  ignoring the more important 

part of the state machinery – how power is exercised, or in other words, the quality of how the state 

manages to govern society. As argued by Fukuyama (2013), this seems to have been driven by an 

underlying ideological view inspired by neo-classical economics and particularly strong in the Unit-

ed  States,  which  emphasizes  the  need  to  limit,  check  and  control  (and  also  minimize)  the  state 

which is basically seen as “predatory” organization.  The result is that the quality of the administra-

tive part of the state that we now know is of the outmost importance for increasing human well-

being has been severely under-studied, under-theorized and under-measured in political science. It 

 

5 

is  also  (and maybe  even  more)  surprising  that  public  administration scholars  have largely  ignored 

this comparative “human well-being” aspect of their enterprise (cf.Pierre and Peters 2009).  In sum, 

a political science that ignores to empirically study and lacks a sound theoretical conception of the 

part of the state that is most important for delivering human well-being (and political legitimacy!) 

deserves  all  the  critique  for  being  irrelevant  that  has  lately  been  launched  against  the  discipline 

(Cohen 2009). If the purpose of the political science enterprise is related to improving human well-

being, we need to know three things. First, how should be conceptualize what is to be understood 

as  “good  governance”,  “quality  of  government”  and/or  “state  capacity”?  Secondly,  how  can  we 

produce  reasonably  valid  and  reliable  measures  for  this  part  of  the  state  apparatus?  Thirdly,  how 

should we theorize the causal logic between quality of government, etc. and the type of outcomes 

mentioned above? In some cases, this is not so difficult since it is pretty obvious why an incompe-

tent, corrupt, unprofessional and underfunded public health care system will not make child birth 

safe for women or babies. In other cases, this is more complicated. For example, why would high 

quality of government decrease the risk of civil war, make people more satisfied with their lives and 

make them think that in general, most people in their society can be trusted?  

The Problem with “Governance” 

A central problem in this discussion is that there are at least three very different ideas of what con-

stitutes  “governance”  in  the  social  sciences. The first  has  its background  mainly  in  public  admin-

istration and public policy analysis of western democracies. Its basis was the recognition, beginning 

in the early 1990s, that an increasing number of empirical studies had shown that western democra-

cies  no  longer  relied  mainly  on  government  authorities  when  trying  to  reach  public  or  collective 

goals. It was argued that traditional public administration structures that used to have a monopoly, 

or  at  least  was  the  main  actor,  in  implementing  public  policies,  had  been  weakened,  replaced,  or 

challenged by various forms of public-private partnerships and more lose networks of organizations 

including also various civil society organizations, trade organizations and private companies (Pierre 

2000).  The  empirical  studies  showed  that  various  forms  of  market  solutions  were  also  used  for 

providing what were essentially public goods, such as for example publicly financed charter school 

systems and pseudo-market systems in the provision of health care. This development was seen as a 

result of a long standing critique in western democracies of the traditional type of Weberian type of 

public administration as being “rigid and bureaucratic, expensive and inefficient” (Pierre and Peters 

2005, 5).  

 

6 

The critique of the Weberian model of bureaucracy as not being able to function well for the more 

interventionist  and  “human-processing”  public  policies, has  been  almost  endless  (Rothstein  1998; 

du Gay 2000).  In this line of research and theory, governance is seen as a society’s pursuit of col-

lective goals, through various forms of steering and coordination, independently of the formal sta-

tus of the actors that are involved (Pierre and Peters 2000; Levi-Faur 2012b). Normatively as well as 

empirically,  large  parts  of  this  approach  to  governance,  that  I  would  prefer  to  label  as  the  policy 

approach to governance, the main idea was built on a critique of the classical Weberian model of 

public administration. The critique pointed at the fact that this top-down steering of public admin-

istration  lacked  participatory  elements  and  that  it  was  incapable  of  handling  the  type  of  complex 

implementation tasks that modern western societies were in need of. Especially, what came to be 

known  as  implementation  research,  showed  a number of  pathological  trends,  when  central  policy 

ambitions and programs meet reality on the ground (Rothstein 1998, ch. 3). Under umbrella terms 

such  as  “new  public  administration”,  both  more  market  oriented  governance  systems  as  well  as 

more  network  and  participatory  systems  were  supposed  to  provide  more  flexibility  and  increased 

adaption of steering measures to a more demanding and competitive oriented society (Lynn 2012). 

A large part of this literature also argued that the public administration should use more of compe-

tition and performance based measures imported from the private sector (Laegreid and Christensen 

2007).  

This post-Weberian policy approach to governance has become a fairly large enterprise, judged by 

number of publications and citations  (Levi-Faur 2012a). For example, it almost completely domi-

nates the recently published 800 pages  Oxford Handbook of Governance. The index of this handbook 

has only five entries about corruption, but fifty about participatory governance and forty-eight on network 

governance. The same can be seen in the only international academic journal that is titled Governance – 

searching  for  the  term  management  in  abstracts  yields  five  times  as  many  articles  than  a  search  on 

corruption. It should also be noted that this approach to governance rarely concerns issues about the 

public administration in developing countries (Pierre and Rothstein 2011)  

 The problem is that the conceptualization of governance in this approach is not overwhelmingly 

precise. On the contrary, leading governance scholars tend to make a virtue of conceptual ambigui-

ty. An example is David Levi-Faur (2012a, 3) who in his introductory editorial chapter to the Hand-

book of Governance mentioned above states that this publication intends to demonstrate that “govern-

ance  is  increasingly  becoming  a  broad  concept  that  is  central  to  the  study  of  political,  economic, 

 

7 

spatial and social order in general”. In a critical analysis, Claus Offe  (2009) has pointed to the fact 

that the concept is empty of agency. There is no verb form of the word like there is for govern-

ment. Members of the government can govern but what it is that members of a network of govern-

ance are doing? In reality, the concept tends to capture all forms of collective social co-ordination, 

outside  pure  market  relations  or  the  family.  The  problem  is  that  such  a  broad  understanding  of 

governance makes it difficult to distinguish it from all other forms of social co-ordination. To para-

phrase  what  Aaron  Wildavsky  (1973)  said  about  another  once  popular  concept  (yes,  many  years 

ago): “If planning is everything, maybe it’s nothing”. 

 In this policy approach to governance, there is now a widespread discussion of entities like “global 

governance”, “corporate governance”, “interactive governance” and “network governance” just to 

name a few. My impression is that governance in this public administration and public policy ap-

proach should be seen as a meta-concept for all possible forms of order (or disorder) in a number 

of different settings – from the very local to the global and from the very political and state-centred 

to  various  private  networks  that  exists  outside  and  has  a  minimal  relation  to  the  state.  It  may  be 

possible  to  assess  the  quality  of  governance  in  specific  sectors  with  this  approach  (see  Levi-Faur 

2012b). However, it goes without saying that “assessing the quality of governance”, as it is under-

stood in this policy approach for a whole country, region or even a city cannot be accomplished in 

any meaningful way. Leading scholars in this approach also argue that it is not a feasible enterprise 

to try to establish quantifiable measures of this type of governance for comparing analyses. Instead, 

they argue for qualitative “process-tracing” case studies (Torfing et al. 2012, p. 84, ). While I think 

that this policy approach to governance empirically captures an important development in Western 

liberal democracies, the conceptual net is simply too big for assessing what goes on in a country as 

a whole. A second problem is that there are very few normative analyses of what should constitute 

“good” or “high quality” in this approach to governance since it is usually unrelated to the type of 

measures of human well-being discussed above. What can be done within this approach is assessing 

governance in particular sectors, such as the health care system in a country or region, or at certain 

levels of government, such as the city or village level.   

A  second  approach  to  “governance”  is  what  has  become  known  as  “participatory  governance”. 

This approach emphasize the role that ordinary citizens can play in influencing politics outside (or 

beside) the traditional channels in representative democracy such as voting and activity in political 

parties. A strong focus in this approach is given to various forms of deliberative practices in which 

 

8 

citizens  can  discuss  and  form  opinions  about  how  to  solve  various  collective  problems  (Bevir 

2010a; Bellina et al. 2009). This is inspired by theories emphasizing the importance of broad based 

and open systems for collective deliberation in public decision making either as a complement or as 

an alternative to the system of representative democracy. Another important part of this approach 

is  how  various  “grass-root”  organizations  can  become  involved  and  consulted  in  policymaking  as 

well as taking responsibility for the provision of public services. The development of this approach 

can be seen as a response to what has become known as the “democratic deficit” problem in many 

international organizations, the paramount example being the European Union. It is, however, also 

applied at the very local level when citizens are given possibilities for “voice” outside the electoral-

parliamentary system such  as  in  public  hearings  and  other  organized  deliberative  processes  (Bevir 

2010a; Popovski and Cheema 2010).   

The discussion about the advantages of new and more participatory forms of engaging citizens in 

public decision-making in liberal democracies and the effects of increased possibilities for delibera-

tion is in itself interesting. In my view, the problem of an increasing “democratic deficit” is in many 

cases  for  real.  There  are,  however,  two  main  problems  with  “democratic  governance”  from  the 

perspective of increasing the relevance of political science by focusing on the part of the political 

system that turns out to have a significant effect on people’s life situation. One is that “democratic 

governance” blurs the distinction between “access to power” and “exercise of power”. The second 

is that so far, the lack of conceptual precision in this approach has prevented the production of any 

standard measure for this concept which can be used in comparative research.  

What is interesting is that at the same time as the above mentioned approaches to governance start-

ed to mushroom, a very different idea of what this concept entails saw the light of day. The back-

ground  of  this  approach  was  not  located  in  studies  of  public  administration  and  public  policy  in 

mature western democracies, but instead located in discussions in research about development and 

(the lack of) economic growth, in third-world (and later transition) countries. In common language, 

the approach argued that the institutionalized “rules of the game” should have a more central role 

in  social  science  research  and  especially  for  explaining  variation  in  social  and  economic  develop-

ment (North 1990; Shirley 2005; Greif 2005; Smith 2007). In this approach, that I would prefer to 

call the political economy approach to governance, the importance of informal institutions has often been 

stressed  by  leading  scholars  (Ostrom  1990;  North  1998).  However,  in  empirical  research,  these 

“rules  of  the  game” have  de  facto  become  very oriented  towards  state  centred  variables,  such  as: 

 

9 

states’ administrative capacity; the degree to which the rule-of-law principles are respected; the level 

of corruption in the public sector; the effectiveness and professionalism in the public administra-

tion;  the  secure  enforcement  of  property  rights,  and  meritocratic  recruitment  of  civil  servants 

(Smith 2007). This idea of “good governance” for achieving social and economic development has 

become central for many international development organizations. For instance, in the mid-1990s, 

when the World Bank started to emphasize the negative impact of corruption, in the public sector, 

on economic development, this lead to the establishment of the Work Bank Governance Indicators 

project  (Kaufmann  et  al.  2005;  Kaufmann  2004)  (Kaufmann  et  al.  2005).  An  important  empirical 

result was produced by Evans and Rauch (1999), who already in the late 1990s showed that a We-

berian  type  of  public  administration  had  a  positive  impact  on  economic  growth  for  developing 

countries.  

Good governance is now used, in particular, by many national development agencies and international 

organisations, such as the World Bank and the United Nations. One example is the International 

Monetary Fund that in 1996 declared that "promoting good governance in all its aspects, including by ensuring 

the rule of law, improving the efficiency and accountability of the public sector, and tackling corruption, as essential 

elements of a framework within which economies can prosper” (Rothstein 2012a, 143). In development policy 

circles, this “good governance” agenda has to a large extent replaced what was known as the Wash-

ington Consensus. This approach stated that economic growth could be created by systematic deregu-

lations  of  markets,  tightening  of  public  spending,  guarantees  for  property  rights,  and  large  scale 

privatizations (Serra and Stiglitz 2008). The reason why this strategy did not work was, according to 

many observers, that poor countries lacked the necessary type of institutions that were “taken for 

granted”  in  neo-classical  economics.  Among  those,  leading  development  economist  Dani  Rodrik 

listed institutions such as “a regulatory apparatus curbing the worst forms of fraud, anti-competitive 

behavior,  and  moral  hazard”  and  “the  rule  of  law  and  clean  government”.  According  to  Rodrik, 

these  were  institutions  that  economists  usually  took  for  granted  “but  which  are  conspicuous  by 

their absence in poor countries” (Rodrik 2007, 97). In the former communist countries, this strate-

gy  became  known  as  “shock-therapy  capitalism”.  It  ran  into  a  number  of  problems,  not  least  be-

cause its proponents did not pay adequate attention to the need for institutions, which would hin-

der fraudulent, anti-competitive, corrupt, and other similar types of destructive  behaviour (Kornai 

et al. 2004).  

 

10 

As should be obvious, what is understood as “governance” in this development research perspec-

tive  is  very  different  from  the  approach  that  has  come  out  of  the  post-Weberian  critique  of  the 

hierarchical  model  of  top-down  steering  in  public  administration  analysis  centred  on  problems  in 

liberal  western  democracies.  In  the  political-economy  approach  to  development,  governance  is  a 

very state-centred concept referring mainly to specific traits in the court system and the public ad-

ministration (Norris 2012). A first conclusion is that much of the complaints that the governance 

concept  is  ill-defined  (Lynn  2012,  49ff;  Fukuyama  2011,  469)  stems  from  the  fact  that  these  two 

almost completely different approaches, use the same term, each with their own specific intellectual 

as well as policy background. I would argue that much of the conceptual confusion in governance 

research is caused by the conflation of these two very different approaches to the subject. A second 

conclusion  is  that  since  the  development  approach  has  a  more  restricted  idea  of  where  “govern-

ance” is located, the possibility for creating a definition, that is specific and precise enough to be 

operationalized for assessing and measuring governance in a specific country should increase.  This 

is also why I prefer the term “quality of government” (henceforth QoG) instead of “good govern-

ance”.  

It is to this task that the rest of this paper will be devoted. The conceptual discussion that will fol-

low builds on and expands earlier efforts that I (together with Jan Teorell) have made in this con-

ceptual enterprise (Rothstein and Teorell 2012; Rothstein 2011b; Rothstein and Teorell 2008). I will 

also take the opportunity to reply to some recent criticism. The overall ambition for this theoretical 

enterprise is nothing less than to provide what Fukuyama (2004, 22) has asked for, namely “a theo-

ry  of  institutions,  that  can  be  generalized,  and  that  will  provide  the  basis  for  policy  guidance  for 

poor countries”. This “policy guidance” is based a normative theory about justice called “the capa-

bility approach” launched by Amartya Sen (Sen 1979, 2009). In extremely short terms, this theory 

suggests  that  justice  requires  that  the  state  ensures  all  individuals  a  set  of  basic  resources  that  will 

equalize  their  chances  to  reach  their  potential  as  humans  which  is  the  motivation  for  having 

measures  human  well-being  as  the  core  dependent  variable.    Thus,  we  are  not  interested  in  state 

capacity for states being successful in wars, or for being effective in ethnic cleansing or for oppress-

ing various minorities. Instead, as argued by Hall and Lamont  (2009), what we are interested in is 

why some states are more successful than others in supplying their citizens with the type of capabil-

ities (or basic resources) as suggest by Sen’s theory of justice. Below, I will introduce a number of 

dimensions on which this theoretical enterprise has to make choices and present my arguments for 

 

11 

the  choices  made.  In  this  I  rely  heavily  of  the  approach  about  concept  formation  (and  misfor-

mation) in political science that goes back to Giovanni Sartori and that has been deepened by for 

example  David  Collier,  John  Gerring  and  Andreas  Schedler  (Schedler  2010).  It  should  be  kept  in 

mind that we are striving for a definition of QoG that can be operationalized in such a way that we 

can  actually  measure  the  level  of  QoG  in  different  countries  (or  regions  or  cities  or  branches  of 

public administration within these entities).  

Normative or empirical strategy 

One issue is if QoG should be defined by a certain norm that pertain to how government power is 

exercised or if it is a more empirical “thing”, for example bureaucratic “autonomy and capacity” as 

tentatively suggested by Fukuyama (2013). There are three reasons why I think a normative defini-

tion  is  necessary.  First,  terms  like  of  “good”  or  “quality”  are  inherently  normative.  Something  is 

“good” or has high/low “quality” in relation to a certain norm (or norms) and it is therefore neces-

sary  to  specify  this  norm.  Trying  to  define  good  governance  while  ignoring  the  normative  issue  of 

what should constitute “good” defies logic. Secondly, the empirical results show that when people 

make up their mind of whether or not they find their governments legitimate, how a state’s power 

is  exercised  turns  out  to  be  more  important for  them  than  their  rights  pertaining  to  the  “access” 

side  of  the  political  system.  Since  perceptions  of  political  legitimacy  are  inherently  normative,  we 

have to theorize this norm. It should be noted that the legitimacy of how the access side of a dem-

ocratic  system  should  be  organized  is,  according  to  Robert  Dahl,  based  on  a  single  basic  norm, 

namely political equality (Dahl 2006, 1989). Thus, if what happens at the “output side” is more im-

portant for citizens when they make up their mind of whether their government is to be considered 

legitimate,  we  should  be  able  to  find  the  parallel  basic  norm  for  this  part  of  the  political  system. 

Obviously, it cannot be “political equality” since most laws and public policies entails that citizens 

should  be treated  differently  (pay  different  taxes,  get  different  benefits,  subsidies  and services  de-

pendent on their specific situation and circumstances).  Thirdly, the risk with empirical definitions is 

that they will become tautological. One example is the definition of good institutions provided by 

Acemoglu and Robinson (2012). Their now well-known argument is that it is institutions of a cer-

tain  kind  that  promote  economic  prosperity.  Such  institutions,  they  argue,  should  be  “inclusive”. 

With this, they mean institutions that “allow and encourage participation by the great mass of peo-

ple in economic activities that make best use of their talents and skill and enable them to make the 

choices  they  wish”.  Such  institutions  should  also  “secure  private  property,  an  unbiased  system  of 

 

12 

law, and a provision of services that provides a level playing field in which people can exchange and 

contract”. Moreover, such institutions “also must permit the entry of new business and allow peo-

ple to choose their careers”. The list does not stop, the institutions that are needed for economic 

prosperity should also “distribute power broadly in society” and ensure that “political power rests 

with a broad coalition or plurality of groups” (Acemoglu and Robinson 2012, 73 and 80).  

The problem with this definition is that it is very close to what the theory intends to explain. How 

surprised  should  we  be  that  a  society  with  such  “inclusive”  institutions  will  create  the  good  and 

prosperous society and that a society with the opposite type of “extractive” institutions will be bad 

and poor? What they are saying is basically that a good society will produce a good (or prosperous) 

society. The central issue is this: If a society decides to organize its public administration according 

a certain norm (or set of norms) which states for example who will work in this administration and 

according to which principle(s) civil servants and professionals will make decisions, will this result 

in higher organizational capacity and will this make it more likely that the politicians will entrust this 

administration with a certain degree of autonomy? The empirical answer to this question seems to 

be in the affirmative. If civil servants are recruited based on the norm of impartiality, which means 

that factual merits for the job in question is what decides recruitment and promotion, this will lead 

to higher QoG, and higher state capacity, which in turn will lead to increased levels of human well-

being  (Dahlström  et  al.  2011;  Rothstein  2012b;  Teorell  2009).  The  question  raised  by  Fukuyama 

(2013:349),  i.e.,    if  impartiality  as  the  basic  norm  for  how  the  state  interacts  with  its  citizens  will 

result in increased state capacity - is thus no longer only “simply asserted” but empirically ground-

ed.  

Should  the  definition  be  based  on  political  procedures  or  policy 

substance? 

Is QoG something that should be defined by reference to a set of political procedures or should it 

be defined by reference to certain policies or outcomes. An example of the latter the well-known 

definition of “good governance” provided by Daniel Kaufmann and colleagues at the World Bank 

researchers  which  among  other  things  include  “sound  policies”  (Kaufmann  et  al.  2004).  Others 

argue wants to include the “moral content” of enacted laws and policies (Agnafors 2013). The well-

known problem with any substantive definition of democracy and thereby QoG is why people, that 

can be expected to have very different views about policies, should accept them. Since we are opt-

 

13 

ing  for  a  definition  which  can  be  universally  accepted  and  applied,  including  specific  policies  be-

comes problematic. To use Rawls terminology, political legitimacy requires an “overlapping consen-

sus”  about  the  basic  institutions  for  justice  in  a  society  so  that  citizens  will  continue  to  support 

them even when they have incommensurable conceptions of “the meaning, value and purpose of 

human life” and even if their group would lose political power (Rawls 2005). This is of course less 

likely  to  be  the  case  if  specific  (sound)  policies  or  moral  content  of  the  laws  are  included  in  the 

definition of QoG.  

Including  the  World  Bank’s  “sound  policies”  in  the  definition  also  raises  the  quite  problematic 

question  if  international  (mostly  economic)  experts  really  can  be  expected  to  be  in  possession  of 

reliable answers to the question of what “sound policies” are. For example, should pensions, health 

care  or  education  be  privately  or  publicly  funded  (or  a  mix  of  these)?  To  what  extent  and  how 

should financial institutions be regulated?  Secondly, such a definition of QoG which is not restrict-

ed  to  procedures  but  includes  the  substance  of  policies  raises  what  is  known  as  the  “Platonian-

Leninist” problem. If those with superior knowledge decide policies, the democratic process will be 

emptied  of  most  substantial  issues.  The  argument  against  the  “Platonian-Leninist”  alternative  to 

democracy  has  been  put  forward  by  one of  the  leading  democratic  theorists, Robert  Dahl,  in  the 

following way: “its extraordinary demands on the knowledge and virtue of the guardians are all but 

impossible to satisfy in practice” (Dahl 1989, 65). All this implies that a strictly procedural defini-

tion  of  QoG  is  to  be  preferred.  This  also  follows  from  the  ambition  to  strive  for  a  definition  of 

QoG that is parallel to how the “access side” for liberal representative democracy usually is defined 

which  speaks  for  a  strictly  procedural  definition.  The  system  known  as  liberal  representative  de-

mocracy should not in itself favour any specific set of policies or moral standards.  From the per-

spective  of  legitimacy,  it  should  be  noted  that  there  is  ample  evidence  from  experimental  studies 

showing that when people decide if a decision by a public authority that affects them is just, they do 

not only take into consideration the “what did I get” issue. Instead, “how they got it” – the fairness 

in the actual procedure in which the decision is implemented is in most cases more important for 

them to accept the outcome, especially in  cases when the outcome is a negative one  (Tyler 1992; 

Levi et al. 2009).   

There  is  a  well-known  drawback  to  all  procedural  definitions  of  political  processes  for  decision-

making, namely that they cannot offer a guarantee against morally bad decisions. As is well-known, 

there is no guarantee against perfectly democratically made decisions in a representative democracy 

 

14 

will result in severe violations of the rights of minorities and individuals. As Mann has argued, there 

is a “dark side” to democracy  (Mann 2005). This is also the case for any procedural definition of 

QoG, be it ethical universalism (Mungiu-Pippidi 2006), impersonal rule (North et al. 2009), bureau-

cratic  autonomy  and  capacity  (Fukuyama  2013)  or  impartiality  in  the  exercise  of  public  power 

(Rothstein and Teorell 2008) . In this approach, I think the strategy suggested by John Rawls is the 

right one. His central idea is that if a society structures its systems for making and enforcing collec-

tive decisions in a fair way, this will increase the likelihood that the outcomes are normatively just.  

Thus, the  probability that a political system that builds the access to power on the fair principle of 

“political equality” will produce outcomes that increase social and political justice is higher than if 

the access to power is organized in a different manner. The equivalent for the administrative side of 

the state would then be that if implementation of policies is based on a norm such as impartiality, 

the probability for normatively good outcomes would increase. As argued above, empirical research 

shows that the latter case is more probable than the former, that is, high QoG has a much stronger 

impact on measures of human well-being than representative democracy has. Given a fair political 

order such as high QoG, this is what we can expect but again, not guarantee. This is what Philippe 

Van Parijs  has labelled the “Rawls-Machiavelli programme” which he argues has two components: 

From Rawls he takes what one should regard as a just political order and from Machiavelli what we, 

from empirical knowledge, can suppose is feasible for “real people” to accomplish (Parijs 2011).  

An argument against defining QoG as based on the principle of impartiality in the exercise of pub-

lic power is that, in theory, a Nazi extermination camp could be administered in an impartial way 

(Agnafors  2013,  Fukuyama  2013).  The  first  thing  to  be  said  about  comments  like  this  is  that  an 

overwhelming part of the historical research about how the Third Reich was administrated gives a 

completely  different  picture.  Instead  of  impartiality,  the  “modus  operandi”  of  the  Nazi  state  was 

systematic  political  and  ideological  motivated  favouritism,  personalistic  rule,  clientelism,  disregard 

and  manipulation  of  the  rule  of  law  principles,  disregarding  professional  knowledge  and  ad-hoc 

decision-making  (Evans 2009; Broszat 1981; Aly 2007). The idea of the impartially administrated 

Nazi  state  or  concentration  camp  belongs  to  the  “crazy  cases”  approach  in  political  philosophy 

which according to Goodin (1982), strongly increases the discipline’s irrelevance. As he stated: 

First  we  are  invited  to  reflect  on  a  few  hypothetical  examples  -  the 

more preposterous, the better apparently. Then, with very little further 

argument or analysis, general moral principles are quickly inferred from 

 

15 

our intuitive responses to these "crazy cases." … Whatever their role in 

settling  deeper  philosophical  issues,  bizarre  hypotheticals  are  of  little 

help in resolving real dilemmas of public policy (Goodin 1982, 8) 

Secondly,  the  same  problem  exists  for  the  procedural  principles  following  from  political  equality 

which forms the basic norm for representative democracy – there is nothing in this norm that hin-

ders the majority in an ever so correct procedural representative democracy to decide illiberal poli-

cies that seriously violate human rights (Zakaria 2003; King 1999) . This problem of possible nor-

matively  unwanted  outcomes  is  unavoidable  if  we  want  to  stay  within  a  procedural  definition  of 

QoG  (or  liberal  democracy).  That  is  why  most  democratization  activists  and organizations  nowa-

days usually speak of “democracy and human rights” as if these are inseparable. There is certainly 

nothing  that  hinders  policy  activists  and  policy  organizations  to  start  promoting  “quality  of  gov-

ernment and human rights” (something that I certainly would support). However, from a theoreti-

cal perspective, democracy, quality of government and human rights are separate things and should 

not be conflated since we want to know how they are empirically related. As stated by Fukuyama 

(2013:351), we probably would not like to “argue that the U.S. military is a low-quality one because 

it  does  things  we  disapprove  of,  say,  invading  Iraq?”  If  we  define  QoG  by  “good  outcomes”  or 

include “the moral status of the laws” and/or the “public ethos” (Agnafors 2013), we will be creat-

ing a conceptual tautology saying that society with a high moral standard and a good “public ethos” 

will result in good outcomes. Simply put, we must have the intellectual courage to admit that a pub-

lic organization can have a high quality or capacity in doing what it does even if we from a moral 

perspective disapprove of what it is doing. Otherwise, QoG is just simply when a public authority 

efficiently implements the policies that we happen to like.  

The advantage with a procedural strategy is that it is more likely to attain a broad based acceptance 

(i.e.,  Rawls’  “overlapping  consensus”)  even  in  a  society  with  groups  that  have  incommensurable 

ideas of “the good”. If QoG would include “the moral status of the laws”  (Agnafors 2013) as de-

fined by some ideology, it is very unlikely that a Rawlsian “overlapping consensus” can be reached.  

However, if we decided to stay within a procedural definition of QoG, as the empirical results men-

tioned above show, this will increase the probability of outcomes that increases human well-being 

in  the  form  of  extended  capabilities  for  citizens  as  suggested  by  Amartya  Sen’s  theory  of  justice. 

Empirically,  as  argued  above,  there  is  ample  evidence  that  this  is  also  the  case  (Teorell  2009; 

Holmberg  and  Rothstein  2012;  Charron  et  al.  2013).    In  sum,  the  procedural  strategy  in  defining 

 

16 

QoG can be said to rest on an assumed probability that if the political system of a society is based 

on procedures which can be normatively motived as fair, this will increase the likelihood of norma-

tively just outcomes. The alternative substantive definitional strategy is less likely to achieve “over-

lapping  consensus”  since  there  is  not  much  agreement  in  many  countries  in  the  world  of  what 

should constitute what the economists argue are “sound policies” or the philosophers claim to be 

the right “moral status of the laws”.  

Should the definition of QoG be multi- or unidimensional? 

Several attempts to define QoG have argued for a multi-dimensional or “complex” strategy. QoG 

should  entail  that  decisions  in  the  public  administration  adhere  to  “efficiency”,  “public  ethos”, 

“good  decision-making”,  “transparency”,  accountability”    and  “stability”  to  name  a  few.  Others 

have argued for a uni-dimensional strategy (Rothstein & Teorell 2008, Mungiu-Pippidi 2006, North 

et al 2009). There are several drawbacks with the multi-dimensional strategy. The first one is that 

we  may  treat  what  is  basically  an  empirical  question  by  definitional  fiat.  Simply  put,  we  want  to 

explain why high QoG makes some states’ public administration more efficient than others and this 

implies that we cannot include efficiency in the definition of QoG since we don’t want to state that 

efficiency explains efficiency. The same goes for “good decision-making” (as suggested by Agnafors 

2013) and “capacity” (as suggested by Fukuyama 2013). We want a definition of QoG that can be 

helpful in explaining why the public administration in some states have a better capacity for making 

good decisions than the public administration in other states (or regions, cities) and if we include 

what we want to explain in the definition this explanatory purpose becomes impossible.  

The  problem  with  “accountability”  is  that  it  is  only  a  tool.  No  organization  or  bureaucrat  can  be 

held  accountable  in  general  since  you  are  always  held  accountable  according  to  some  specified 

normative standard(s). Without defining this normative standard(s), accountability as well as trans-

parency  are  empty  concepts.  Another  well-known  problem  with  multi-dimensional  definitions  is 

how to handle a situation when a state for which we want to measure QoG shows very different 

values on the dimensions. The World Bank researchers include five different dimensions and Agna-

fors (2013) for example includes no less than six dimensions. The question then becomes how to 

handle a situation where the rule of law is zero but where there is maximum efficiency (or stability, 

or public ethos, or good decision making). Would that be a state with fifty per cent QoG?  As Ag-

nafors  (2013)  readily  admits,  there  can  be  “no  universal  and  complete  weighing  procedure”  for 

 

17 

solving this problem. His solution is that “one can perform an incomplete weighing, at least in theory, 

because it will be inescapably messy in practice”.  

This line of reasoning is a luxury that many political philosophers think they can afford since they 

seldom engage in empirical research or take responsibility for the administrative or practical side of 

their  policy  suggestions  (Wolff  2011).  As  Agnafors  (2013)  states  it,  he  does  not  want  to  take  re-

sponsibility for how his many criteria for what should be included in QoG should be weighed when 

they come into conflict. He readily admits that his method is “incomplete” and then he adds that he 

does not want to address “the extent to which such incompleteness can be overcome”. Avoiding 

responsibility in this way does not work for political scientists who care about the relevance of their 

research for peoples’ well-being. Producing a definition that cannot be operationalized in any mean-

ingful sense will not help us answer the question of why some states are much more successful than 

others  in  implementing  policies  that  cater  to  the  basic  needs  (capabilities)  of  their  citizens.  If  we 

were to follow this conceptual strategy, the question of what politics can do against, for example, 

sever  child  deprivation  or  extremely  high  rates  of  women  dying  when  giving  birth,  will  never  be 

answered.  Here, Agnafors (2013) as well as many other contemporary political philosophers stand 

in sharp contradiction to John Rawls who argued that “political philosophy must describe workable 

political arrangements that can gain support from real people” (Wenar 2012). Rawls’ famous theory 

of justice does entail two basic principles but, nota bene, they are lexically ordered making it is clear 

which of them that has priority (Wenar 2012).   

As argued by Van Parijs (2011:1), “it is sound intellectual policy… not to make our concepts too 

fat”. He continues, and I agree, that “fat concepts hinder clear thinking and foster wishful thinking. 

By packing many good things under a single label, one is easily misled into believing that they never 

clash”. As known ever since William Ockham’s days, ontological parsimony is an analytical virtue. 

In  sum,  the  conceptual  obesity  that  is  suggested  by  Agnafors  (2013)  and  many  others  for  what 

should constitute QoG will inevitably lead to explanatory impotence and thereby become unusable 

for policy recommendations. This is not only a question of internal academic civilities and intellec-

tual hair-splitting since we now know that low QoG has severe effects on human well-being. As I 

have  shown  elsewhere  (Rothstein  1998,  2011a),  political  philosophers  often  propose  policies  for 

which a large body of implementation research shows is beyond any known administration’s capaci-

 

18 

ty to carry out2. If a state would try to implement the policies they often suggest, this would lead to 

“bureaucratic  nightmares”  that  in  all  likelihood  would  create  a  majority  against  policy  efforts  for 

increased human well-being. These über-elaborated, über-complex, and über fine-tuned principles 

(definitions) are thus counterproductive for realizing the principles the philosophers define as serv-

ing the purpose of increased justice.   

Is QoG universal or relativistic? 

The  development  of  the  international  good  governance  and  anti-corruption  regime  since  the  late 

1990s has not been without its critiques. One point that has been stressed in this critique is that the 

international anti-corruption agenda represents a specific western liberal ideal that is not easily ap-

plicable to countries outside that part of the world (Heidenheimer 2002; Bukovansky 2006; Bratsis 

2003). There are at least three arguments against this type of relativistic conceptual framework. The 

first  is  that  if  we  would  accept  a  relativistic  definition  of  corruption  or  QoG,  all  efforts  to  make 

empirical comparisons between countries in different parts of the world are in vain. It would im-

possible to verify that for example Denmark has less corruption than Nigeria since what is regarded 

as corruption in these two political cultures is in the relativistic approach completely different. This 

is  the  problem  with  the  standard  definition  of  corruption  as  “abuse  of  public  power  for  private 

gain”.    Since  the  norm  or  principle  that  is  “abused”  is  not  defined,  this  definition  is  empty  and 

thereby it invites relativistic notions of what corruption is. The second main argument against rela-

tivism in this area is normative and based on the similar discussion in the areas of human rights and 

democracy. First, the right not to be discriminated by public authorities, the right not to have to pay 

bribes  for  what  should  be  free  public  services  and  the  right  to  get  treat  with  “equal  concern  and 

respect” from the courts are in fact not very distant for what counts as universal human rights.  For 

example, for people that do not get the health care they are entitled to because they cannot afford 

the bribes the doctors demand, corruption can result in a life-threatening situation.  The same can 

occur for citizens that do not get protection by the police because they do not belong to the “right” 

group.  The  third  reason  against  a  relativistic  definition  of  corruption  is  empirical.  Although  the 

empirical research in this area is not entirely unambiguous, most of it points to the quite surprising 

result that people in very different cultures seem to have a very similar notion of what should count 

as corruption. Survey results from regions in India and in Sub-Saharan Africa show that people in 

                                                      

2 The major sinners are the approaches known as ”luck-egalitarianism” and the advocates for ”basic income”.  

 

19 

these societies take a very clear stand against corruption and understands the problem in the same 

manner as it is understood by for example organizations such as the World Bank and Transparency 

International (Widmalm 2008, 2005; Miller et al. 2001; Nichols et al. 2004). 

For  example,    asked  by the  Afrobarometer (2006)  survey  whether  they  consider  it “not  wrong  at 

all,” “wrong but understandable,” or “wrong and punishable” if a public official: 1) decides to lo-

cate a development project in an area where his friends and supporters live; 2) gives a job to some-

one  from  his  family  who  does  not  have  adequate  qualifications,  and;  3)  demands  a  favour  or  an 

additional payment for some service that is part of his job, a clear majority of  respondents in coun-

tries severely hit by corruption such as Kenya and Uganda deemed all three acts both wrong and 

punishable (see figure 1 below). 

 

FIGURE 1. MORAL APPROVAL OF CORRUPTION 

Source: Mattes et. al 2008. ,(n = 1278 for Kenya and 2400 for Uganda).  

 

 

20 

0102030405060708090Not wrong at allWrong butunderstandableWrong and punishableDon't knowDegree of acceptancePercent who agree with the statementA public official decides to locate a development project in an area where his friends and supporters livedA government official gives a job to someone from his family who does not have adequate qualificationsA government official demands a favor or an additional payment for some service that is part of his jobAs  can  be  seen,  it  is  only  a  small  minority  of  the  respondents  who  find  that  such  acts  are  “not 

wrong  at  all”  and  the  group  that  finds them  “wrong  but  understandable”  is  also  small.  Widmalm 

(2005, 2008) finds similar results in a survey study of villages in India. Although, in reality an absent 

figure in these villages, Widmalm finds that the Weberian civil servant model (impartial treatment 

of  citizens  disregarding  income,  status,  class,  caste,  gender,  and  religion),  has  a  surprisingly  large 

support among the village population.   In other words, the idea put forward by among others Hei-

denheimer (2002) that the public acceptance of what is commonly understood as corruption varies 

significantly across cultures does not find support here.   

The reason why people, although condemning corruption, participate in corrupt practices seem to 

be that they understand the situation as a “collective action” problem where it makes little sense to 

be “the only one” that refrains from using or accepting bribes and other kick-backs (Karklins 2005; 

Persson et al. 2013).  As Gunnar Myrdal stated in his analysis of the “soft state” problem in devel-

oping countries already in the 1960s,”Well, if everybody seems corrupt, why shouldn't I be corrupt” 

(Myrdal 1969, 409). In his anthropological study of corruption in Nigeria, Jordan Smith concludes 

that  “although  Nigerians  recognize  and  condemn,  in  the  abstract,  the  system  of  patronage  that 

dominates the allocation of government resources, in practice people feel locked in” (Jordan Smith 

2007).  It makes little sense to be the only honest policeman in a severely corrupt police force, or 

the only one in the village  who does not pay the doctor under the table to get ones children im-

munized  if  everyone  else  pays  (Persson,  Rothstein  &  Teorell  2013).   In  his  classic study  of  clien-

telism and particularism in southern Italy, Banfield (1958) found that it made perfect sense to all the 

families in the village of Montegranesi to be amoral familists since  everyone was expected to be or 

eventually to perform according to this social template. The spatial universalism of corruption in-

creases  theoretical  depth  when  considering  that  even  temporal  approaches  to  this  phenomenon 

have  provided  similar  conclusions.  Analyses  of  what  counted  as  corruption  in  very  distant  pasts, 

such as the Roman Empire or XIII century France, give the impression of not being different from 

contemporary notions of the concept (MacMullen 1988; Jordan 2009).  

Another set of important empirical results that questions the relativistic position comes from recent 

comparisons of results from expert surveys and surveys of representative samples of citizens.  The 

first  thing  to  note  is  that  various  expert-based  surveys  and  estimations  for  measuring  corruption 

and other theoretically related concepts of “good governance” such as the rule-of-law and the ex-

tent to which impartiality is the basic norm for the civil service in different countries, correlate at a 

 

21 

surprisingly  high  level  (Holmberg  et  al.  2009).  Even  more  interesting  is  that  the  expert-based 

measures of the level of corruption in various countries and measures based on representative sam-

ples of the population correlate strongly. One example is a recent study by Svallfors using the Eu-

ropean Social Survey carried out in 2008 that covers 29 countries in both western and Eastern Eu-

rope (Svallfors 2012). This survey had questions such as if people perceived that the police or the 

public  health  care  gave  “special  advantages  to  certain  people  or  deal  with  everyone  equally?” 

Svallfors compared the answers to questions like this from the sample populations in the 29 coun-

tries with three different expert-based measures: the International Country Risk Guide indicator of 

Quality  of  Government,  the  Transparency  International  Corruption  Index  and  the  World  Bank 

Estimate of Government Efficiency. Comparing the results (using standard Pearson’s correlations) 

from the expert based survey measures and the measures from surveys with representative samples 

of the population, his conclusion is the following: “we find amazingly strong correlations between 

the experts’ judgments and the public’s perceptions. The correlation coefficient is no less than 0.81, 

which indicates that the measures are very strongly interrelated”. This strongly suggests that percep-

tion of corruption correlates with perception of good government, and by extension that judgment 

on the quality of the political and administrative institutions are not seen as a particularistic product. 

Another similar comparison has been done by Bechert and Quandt based on the International So-

cial  Survey  Programme  (ISSP).  In  its  2006  survey,  the  ISSP  for  the  first  time  included  questions 

that would measure the extent of perceptions of corruption. Comparing the results from 35 coun-

tries, including not only the West but also the countries in Eastern Europe, Africa, Asia and South  

America,  with  Transparency  Internationals  expert  based  measure  of  corruption,  they  conclude: 

“The two measurement tools of corruption, one based on expert interviews, the other on probabil-

ity  samples, reveal  astonishingly  similar results”  (Bechert  and  Quandt 2009,  100).  Yet  another re-

cent survey of corruption carried out by the QoG Institute on behalf of the EU commission reveals 

the  same  pattern.  This  study  consisted  of  interviews  with  34000  persons  in  27  EU  countries  and 

has question to not only capture perceptions but also direct experiences of corruption. Again, the 

correlation between results about the level of corruption in various EU countries from the survey 

of “ordinary people” and expert based measures are surprisingly similar (Charron et al. 2013).  The 

conclusion  from  these  results  are  that  “ordinary  people”  in  both  high  and  low  corrupt  countries 

have  the  same  perceptions  and  also  experience  the  same  level  of  corruption  as  the  international 

 

22 

country experts. In sum, there are both empirical and normative arguments speaking in favour of a 

generally accepted definition of corruption and QoG.  

One way to understand why there seems to exist a universal understanding of what should count as 

corruption (or low QoG) despite its enormous variation both in types, frequency and location, is 

what could be labelled as a public goods approach to this problem. In all societies/cultures, in order to 

survive,  all  groups  of  people  have  had  to  produce  at  least  a  minimal  set  of  public  goods  such  as 

security measures, a basic infrastructure or organized/collective forms for the provision of food. As 

Fukuyama  (2011:29ff)  has  argued,  the  very  idea  proposed  by  rational  choice  oriented  contracts 

theorists that we as humans started out as atoms in a state of nature and then decided to rationally 

accept a “social contract” is highly misleading.  

The very nature of a good being “public” is that it is to be managed and distributed according to a 

principle  that  is  very  different  from  that  of  private  goods. The  public  good  principle  implies  that 

the  good  in  question  should  not  be  distributed  according  to  the  private  wishes  of those  who  are 

given he responsibility for managing them.  When this principle for the management and distribu-

tion  of  public  goods  is  broken  by  those  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  for  handling  the  public 

goods, the ones that are victimized see this as malpractice and/or as corruption. This is why cor-

ruption is a concept that is related to the political and not the private sphere and why it is different 

from (or a special case of) theft and breaches of trust in the private sector Much of the confusion 

about cultural relativism in the discussion about what should count as corruption stems from the 

issue that what should count as “public goods” differ between different societies and cultures. For 

example,  in  an  absolutist feudal  country  where  the  understanding may  be  that  the central  admin-

istration  is the private property  of  the  lord/king,  this state  is  not seen  as  a  public good. In many 

indigenous  societies  with  non-state  political  systems,  local  communities  have  usually  produced 

some forms of public goods, for example for taking care of what Elinor Ostrom (1990) defined as 

“common pool resources” which are natural resources that are used by members of the group but 

that  risks  depletion  if  overused.  Such  resources  are  constantly  faced  with  a  “tragedy  of  the  com-

mons” problem and is thus in need of public goods in the form of effective regulations to prevent 

overuse leading to depletion.   My argument departs from the idea that it is difficult to envision a 

society without some public goods. The point is that when these public goods are handled or con-

verted into private goods this is generally understood as corruption independently of the culture. A 

second conclusion is thus that we should not expect indigenous people to have a moral or ethical 

 

23 

understanding corrupt practice that differs from for example what is the dominant view in western 

organizations like Transparency International and the World Bank or as it is stated in the UN con-

vention  against  corruption.  Instead,  what  may  differ  is  what  is  seen  as  falling  under  the  public 

goods category. An example could be that even in cases where there is not a system for taxation, 

there  are  still  certain  individuals  who  have  been  selected  to  perform  functions  as  arbitrators  or 

judges. These functions are to be understood as public goods because they make it possible to solve 

disputes between village members/families in a non-violent way. These arbitrators may, in several 

cases, receive gifts from the parties involved for their services. Such gifts may for a westerner look 

like bribes, but they are usually not seen as bribes by the agents , who  make a functional distinction 

between  bribes  and  gifts  (Sneath  2006;  Werner  2000).   The reasons  for  why  they are  not seen  as 

bribes by the local villagers is that:  a)  the gifts are publicly given, and b) there is a culturally de-

fined  level for how big such gift can be.  This implies that the gift is to be seen as a fee for a ser-

vice, not a bribe. It would only be a bribe, and would also by the local people be seen as a bribe, if 

it was given in a way that would influence adjudication by favouring one party over another. In this 

case  the  public  good  is  converted  into  a  private  one,  and  this  is  perceived  as  corruption.  Under-

standing corruption in this public goods approach can thus serve as a solution to the relativism  – 

universalism puzzle that has plagued discussions about this problem for a long time, especially in 

the  lights  of  anthropological  reservations  on  applying  the  dichotomies  public-private,  moral-

immoral. 

Conclusions: Quality of Government and Impartiality 

The conclusion so far is that we should strive for a normative, procedural, universal and parsimo-

nious  definition  of  QoG  that,  moreover,  can  be  operationalized  and  measured.  The  definition 

should not include the system of access to power (e.g., representative democracy) since we want to 

be  able  to  explain  the  relation  between  representative  democracy  and  quality  of  government.  It 

should also not include things like efficiency, capacity and human rights since we want to be able to 

explain  if  QoG  has  a  positive  or  negative  impact  on  these  things.  Following  the  “Rawls-

Machiavelli” programme as suggested by Van Parijs, this conceptual strategy can be seen as resting 

on the assumption (or hope) that if we as political scientists can suggest “just institutions” for mak-

ing  and  implementing  collectively  binding  decisions,  the  people  that  come  to  operate  these  “just 

institutions” are also likely to produce morally good outcomes. The alternative, that we should sug-

gest specific (“sound”) policies or prescribe the “moral status” of the laws runs in the face of the 

 

24 

need to reach an “overlapping consensus” for how collectively binding decisions should be made 

and  implemented.  Again,  no  such  procedural  definition  (of  democracy  or  QoG)  can  work  as  a 

guarantee against morally bad outcomes – we are dealing with probabilities, not absolute certainty. 

Since  empirical  research shows  that higher  levels of  QoG  (but  not representative democracy)  are 

related  to  higher  levels  of  human  well-being  (and  political  legitimacy),  following  Amartya  Sen’s 

capability-oriented theory of justice, we as political scientists have a moral obligation to increase our 

ambitions to define, measure and study what takes place at the “output” side of the political system. 

This  is  not  an  internal  academic  affair  in  which  you  can  sacrifice  what  actually  works  for  what 

would be an ideal (but un-implementable) definition. I have no doubt stating that a major part of 

human misery in today’s world is caused by the fact that a majority of the world’s population are 

forced to live under dysfunctional (low quality) government institutions.      

The  question  is  then  what  would  be  the  equivalent  to  Robert  Dahl’s  political equality  as  the  basic 

norm for the “output” side of the political system.  Based on the type of rights-based liberal politi-

cal  theory  launched  by  philosophers such  as Brian Barry  and  John  Rawls,  Jan Teorell  and  I  have 

suggested such a basic norm, namely impartiality in the exercise of public power. This is defined in 

the following way: “When implementing laws and policies, government officials shall not take anything about the 

citizen or case into consideration that is not beforehand stipulated in the policy or the law”  (Rothstein  &  Teorell 

2008, 170). This definition is fairly precise and, as argued above, it can be applied universally. As we 

have shown in other studies, this definition of QoG can be operationalized and measured in both 

expert surveys and surveys with representative samples of the population. Neither experts nor or-

dinary people seem to have problems understanding and answering the battery of survey-questions 

that  follows  from  this  definition  of  QoG.  Moreover,  these  measures  largely  perform  in  the  ex-

pected way when correlated with various outcome measures such as measures of human-well-being.  

In contrast to the standard definition of corruption, our definition makes clear what basic norm is 

being  “abused”  when  corruption,  clientelism,  favouritism,  discrimination,  patronage,  nepotism  or 

undue  support  to  special  interest  groups  in  the  implementation  of  public  policies  occurs.  It  ex-

cludes the content of policies since it is strictly procedural and it does not include what we want to 

explain such as economic efficiency, administrative capacity or good decision-making. 

What does it mean to be impartial in the exercise of public power? Cupit writes: “To act impartially 

is to be unmoved by certain sorts of considerations  — such as special relationships and personal 

 

25 

preferences. It is to treat people alike irrespective of personal relationships and personal likes and 

dislikes.” (Cupit 2000). The connection to “good” or “quality” is motivated by the fact that impar-

tiality  is  the  driving  notion  behind  John  Rawls’  liberal  right-based  theory  of  justice.  As  Goodin 

argues: “Certainly, the antithesis of justice is favouritism” (Goodin 2004, 100). In this context, im-

partiality is not a demand on actors on the input side of the political system, but first and foremost 

an  attribute  of  the  actions  taken  by  civil  servants,  professional  corpses  in  public  service,  law  en-

forcement personnel and the like. 

In political philosophy, this distinction between which norms should guide the content versus the 

procedural  sides  of  the  political  system  is  readily  seen  in  Brian  Barry’s  important  book  Justice as 

Impartiality. Barry argues that impartiality should be a normative criterion in the exercise of political 

power: “like cases should be treated alike” (Barry 1995, 126). His idea of “second order impartiali-

ty” implies that the input side of the political system should be arranged so that it gives no special 

favour to any conception of “the good”. However, as Barry readily admits, his theory “accepts that 

a demand of neutrality cannot be imposed on the outcomes” (Barry 1995, 238). Accordingly, when 

it  comes to  decisions  about  the  content  of the  policies  that  governments  should  pursue,  it  is  not 

neutrality or impartiality but “reasonableness” that is his main criterion (Barry 1995, 238) By this he 

means that people engaged in the political process should give sound arguments based on a secular 

understanding  of  knowledge  for  why  they  prefer  certain  policies  over  others.  In  Barry’s  words: 

“What is required is as far as possible a polity in which arguments are weighed and the best argu-

ments win, rather than one in which all that can be said is that votes are counted and the side with 

the most votes wins” (Barry 1995, 103).  

The implication is the one argued for here, namely that impartiality cannot be a moral basis for the 

content of policies that individuals, interests groups and political parties pursue on the input side of 

the  political  system  since  reasonableness  is  not  the  same  as  impartiality.  For  example,  in  a  given 

situation there may be good reasons for lowering pensions and increasing support to families with 

children. This is, however, not the same as being impartial between these two groups, because there 

is no such thing as an impartial way to decide in a case like this (Arneson 1998). This is particularly 

problematic when it comes to conflicts over which public goods a state should provide since such 

goods can often not be divided into minor parts (like money), something that often makes reasona-

ble compromises easier to reach. Either the airport or dam is built or nothing is built (Miller 2004). 

The implication is that when a policy has been decided upon by the political system, be it deemed 

 

26 

just or unjust according to whatever universal theory of justice one would apply, QoG implies that 

it has to be implemented in accordance with the principle of impartiality.  

Impartiality  in  the  exercise  of  political  power  should  not  be  conflated  with  equal  treatment  but 

instead that we do not “favor some people over others in illegitimate ways” (Stone 2011, 71). For 

example, applicants to positions in the civil service that have better qualification should be favoured 

over those with lower qualifications. A public school system would usually give children with learn-

ing  problems  more  support  than  children  that  do  not  suffer  such  problems.  Impartiality  implies 

that  only  legitimate  reasons  for  differential  treatment  are  acceptable  and  what  constitute  such  a 

legitimate reason is stated in the policy and/or the law. Impartiality is also not to be conflated with 

indifference (Stone 2011, 79). We do not want social workers or health care personnel to be indif-

ferent  to  the  problems  or  suffering  of  their  clients.  However,  we  would  strongly  object  if  pa-

tients/clients  were  given  favours  because  they had  good  political  connections,  had  paid  bribes  or 

belonged to the “right” ethnic group. 

 It should also be underlined that the argument is not that impartiality is equivalent to “objectivity”. 

Terminology is a tricky business (especially if you trade in a language that is not your own). Still we 

would say that, as a concept, objectivity has an absolute and perfectionist ring to it that implies that 

humans can have full knowledge of a case and weigh all things equal and come down with a deci-

sion as if the outcome was decided by some natural law process. We would argue that impartiality 

implies somewhat more human and realistic demands. First, it is about a “matter of factness”, im-

plying that things which according to the policy/law should not have an impact on the decision are 

to be left out. Secondly, it requires that the public official should not be a party to the case, neither 

directly nor indirectly. Moreover, the idea of QoG as impartiality notion stands in sharp contrast to 

the  public  choice  idea  of  public  officials  maximizing  their  self-interest.  For  example,  an  impartial 

civil servant should not be susceptible to bribery, should not decide in cases where his/her friends 

and relatives are involved, and should not favour any special (ethnic, economic, or any other type 

of organized) interest when applying laws and rules. 

It  is  important  to  note  that,  for  many,  increased  social  justice  implies  policies  that  contain  more 

partiality  (for  example,  extra  resources  to  underprivileged  groups).  However,  proponents  of  such 

policies usually do not want these policies, once enacted, to be implemented in a partial way where 

bureaucrats are given total discretion in each and every case (Tebble 2002; Young 1990). For exam-

 

27 

ple, it may be perfectly legitimate to argue for the government to establish academic positions that 

only women (or some other disadvantaged group) could apply for given the gender inequality that 

exists in higher academic positions. However, once such a position is announced and a number of 

women apply, the impartiality norm takes overhand since those who have argued for such a quota 

system usually wants the most qualified in the preferred group to get the position. This conditional-

ity in the application of impartiality as a justice principle goes in fact all the way back to John Stuart 

Mill:  

Impartiality, in short, as an obligation of justice, may be said to mean 

being exclusively influenced by the considerations which it is supposed 

ought to influence the particular case in hand, and resisting the solicita-

tions  of  any  motives  which  prompt  to  conduct  different  from  what 

those considerations would dictate (Mill 1992 (1861), 154). 

As stated by Rawls, “a just system must generate its own support” (Rawls 1971, 261). The argument 

presented  here  implies  that  such  just  political  system  must  be  based  on  two  completely  opposite 

norms which, moreover, must be handled simultaneously in the very same system. At the “input” 

side of this machinery, partisanship (partiality) is to be seen a fully legitimate. Political parties, inter-

est groups and civil society organizations are in their full right to argue for the enactment of laws 

and policies that cater to their specific and often very partisan political ideologies. This is, after all, 

what democratic politics is about – a competition by various economic, ideological and/or cultural 

interests  who  wants  the  state  to  deliver  policies  that  cater  to  their  interests.  However,  as  shown 

above, when policies and laws are to be implemented, political legitimacy as well as overall human 

well-being is best served if policies and laws are implemented by the opposite norm, namely impar-

tiality. To continue with Rawls, the institutions “must be not only just but framed so as to encour-

age the virtue of justice in those who take part in them” (1971, 262). As the empirical results pre-

sented above indicate, this is precisely what QoG as impartiality does since it increases both human 

well-being and political legitimacy.  

 

 

 

28 

REFERENCES 

Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2012. Why nations fail : the origins of power, pros-

perity and poverty. London: Profile. 

Agnafors, Marcus. 2013. "Quality of Government: Towards a More Complex Definition." Amer-

ican Political Science Review 107 (03). 

Aly, Götz. 2007. Hitler's beneficiaries : plunder, race war, and the Nazi welfare state. 1st U.S. 

ed. New York: Metropolitan. 

Arneson, Richard. 1998. "The Priority of the Right Over the Good Rides Again." In Impartiality, 

Neutrality and Justice, ed. P. Kelly. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 

Banfield, Edward C. 1958. The Moral Basis of a Backward Society. New York: The Free Press. 
Barry, Brian. 1995. Justice as Impartiality. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bechert,  Insa,  and  Markus  Quandt.  2009.  "ISSP  Data  Report:  Attitudes  towards  the  Role  of 
Government." Bonn: GESIS. Liebniz-Institute für Sozialwissenschaften. Working Paper 
2009:2. 

Bellina,  Séverine,  Hervé  Magro,  and  Violaine  de  Villemeur.  2009.  Democratic  governance  :  a 

new paradigm for development? London: C. Hurst. 

Bevir, Mark. 2010a. Democratic Governance. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
———. 2010b. The SAGE Handbook of Governance. 
Bratsis, Peter.  2003.  "The  Construction of  Corruption,  or  Rules of  Separation  and  Illusions of 

Purity in Bourgeois Societies." Social Text 21 (4):9-33. 

Broszat, Martin. 1981. The Hitler state : the foundation and development of the internal struc-

ture of the Third Reich. London: Longman. 

Bukovansky,  Mlada.  2006.  "The  hollowness  of  anti-corruption  discourse."  Review  of  Interna-

tional Political Economy 13 (2):181-209. 

Charron, Nicholas, Victor Lapuente, and Bo Rothstein. 2013.  Quality of Government and Cor-
ruption from a European Perspective: A Comparative Study of Good Government in EU 
regions. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 

Cohen,  Patricia.  2009.  "Field  Study.  Just  How  Relevant  is  Political  Science."  The  New  York 

Times, October 20, 2009. 

Cupit,  Geoffrey.  2000.  "When  Does  Justice  Require  Impartiality?".  London:  Political  Studies 

Association- UK 50th Annual Conference, April 10-13. 

Dahl, Robert A. 1989. Democracy and Its Critics. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
———. 2006. On political equality. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Dahlström, Carl, Victor Lapuente, and Jan Teorell. 2011. "The Merit of Meritocratization: Poli-
tics,  Bureaucracy,  and  the  Institutional  Deterrents  of  Corruption."  Political  Research 
Quarterly 65 (3):656-68. 

Diamond, Larry. 2007. "A Quarter-Century of Promoting Democracy." Journal of Democracy 18 

(4):118-20. 

Doucouliagos, Hristos, and Mehmet Ali. Ulubasoglu. 2008. "Democracy and economic growth: 

A meta-analysis." American Journal of Political Science 52 (1):61-83. 

du Gay, Paul. 2000. In praise of bureaucracy : Weber, organization and ethics. London ; Thou-

sand Oaks: SAGE. 

 

29 

Evans, Peter, and James E. Rauch. 1999. "Bureaucracy and Growth: A Cross-National Analysis 
of the Effects of "Weberian" State Structures on Economic Growth."  American Socio-
logical Review 64 (5):748-65. 

Evans, Richard J. 2009. The coming of the Third Reich. Peterborough: Royal National Institute 

for the Blind. 

Fukuyama, Francis. 2004. State-Building: Governance and World Order in the Twenty-First Cen-

tury. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 

———. 2011.  The Origins of Political Order: From  Prehuman Times to the French Revolution. 

New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux  

Gilley, Bruce. 2006. "The Determinants of State Legitimacy: Results for 72 countries." Interna-

tional Political Science Review 27 (1):47-71. 

———. 2009. The right to rule : how states win and lose legitimacy. New York: Columbia Uni-

versity Press. 

Gjefsen, Torbjorn. 2012. Sources of Legitimacy: Quality of Government and Electoral Democra-

cy, Department of Political Science, University of Oslo, Oslo. 

Goodin,  Robert  E.  1982.  Political  Theory  and  Public  Policy.  Princeton:  Princeton  University 

Press. 

———. 2004. "Democracy, justice and impartiality." In Justice and Democracy, ed. K. Dowding, 

R. E. Goodin and C. Pateman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press  

Greif, Avner. 2005. "Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval 
Trade." In Handbook of Institutional Economics, ed. C. Ménard and M. M. Shirley. Am-
sterdam, the Netherlands: Springer. 

Hall, Peter A., and Michèle Lamont, eds. 2009.  Successful Societies: How Institutions and Cul-

ture Affect Health. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Halleröd,  Björn,  Bo  Rothstein,  Adel  Daoud,  and  Shailen  Nandy.  2013.  "Bad  Governance  and 
Poor Children: A Comparative Analysis of Government Efficiency and Severe Child Dep-
rivation in 68 Low- and Middle-income Countries." World Development 48:19-31. 

Heidenheimer, Arnold J. 2002. "Perspectives on the Perception of Corruption." In Political Cor-
ruption—Concepts  and  Contexts,,  ed.  A.  J.  Heidenheimer  and  M.  Johnston.  New 
Brunswick: Transaction Books. 

Holmberg, Sören, and Bo Rothstein. 2011. "Correlates of Democracy." Gothenburg: The Quali-

ty of Government Institute, University of Gothenburg, Working paper 2011:10. 

Holmberg,  Sören,  Bo  Rothstein,  and  Naghmeh  Nasiritousi.  2009.  "Quality  of  Government: 

What You Get." Annual Review of Political Science 13:135-62. 

Holmberg, Sören, and Bo. Rothstein, eds. 2012.  Good Government: The Relevance of Political 

Science. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 

Jordan Smith, Daniel. 2007. A culture of corruption : everyday deception popular discontent in 

Nigeria. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press. 

Jordan,  William  Chester.  2009.  "Anti-corruption  campaigns  in  thirteenth-century  Europe." 

Journal of Medieval History 35:204-19. 

Karklins,  Rasma.  2005.  The  system  made  me  do  it  :  corruption  in  post-communist  societies. 

Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe. 

Kaufmann, Daniel. 2004. "Governance Redux: The Empirical Challenge." In Global Competitive-

ness Report 2003-2004: World Economic Forum. 

 

30 

Kaufmann,  Daniel,  Aart  Kraay,  and  Massimo  Mastruzzi.  2005.  "Governance  Matters  IV:  Gov-

ernance indicators for 1996-2004." The World Bank Policy Research Group. 

Kaufmann, Daniel, Art Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. 2004. "Governance Matters III: Govern-
ance Indicators for 1996-2002." The World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3106. 

King, Desmond S. 1999. In the name of liberalism : illiberal social policy in the USA and Britain. 

Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Kornai,  János,  Bo  Rothstein,  and  Susan  Rose-Ackerman,  eds.  2004.  Creating  Social  Trust  in 

Post-Socialist Transition. New York: Palgrave/Macmillan. 

Laegreid, Per, and Tom Christensen. 2007. Transcending new public management : the trans-

formation of public sector reforms. Burlington, VT: Ashgate. 

Lapuente, Victor, and Bo Rothstein. 2014. "Civil War Spain versus Swedish Harmony: The Qual-

ity of Government Factor." Comparative Political Studies (forthcoming). 

Levi-Faur, David. 2012a. "From "Big Government" to "Big Governance"." In  The Oxford Hand-

book of Governance, ed. D. Levi-Faur. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

———. 2012b. The Oxford handbook of governance. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Levi,  Margaret,  Audrey  Sacks,  and  Tom  Tyler.  2009.  "Conceptualizing  Legitimacy,  Measuring 

Legitimating Beleifs." American Behavioral Scientist 53 (3). 

Lynn,  Laurence  E.  Jr.  2012.  "The  Many  Faces  of  Governance."  In  The  Oxford  Handbook  of 

Goverance, ed. D. Levi-Faur. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

MacMullen, Ramsay. 1988. Corruption and the decline of Rome. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press. 
Mandela, Nelson. 1994. Long walk to freedom : the autobiography of Nelson Mandela. London: 

Little Brown. 

Mann,  Michael.  2005.  The  dark  side  of  democracy  :  explaining  ethnic  cleansing.  New  York: 

Cambridge University Press. 

Mill, John Stuart. 1992 (1861). On liberty and utilitarianism. New York: Knopf : Distributed by 

Random House. 

Miller, David. 2004. "Justice, Democracy and Public Goods." In  Justice and Democracy, ed. K. 

Dowding, R. E. Goodin and C. Pateman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Miller,  William  L.,  Åse  B.  Grødeland,  and  Tatyana  Y.  Koshechkina.  2001.  A  culture  of  corrup-
tion? : coping with government in post-communist Europe. Budapest: Central Europe-
an University Press. 

Mungiu-Pippidi, Alina. 2006. "Corruption: Diagnosis and Treatment." Journal of Democracy 17 

(3):86-99. 

Myrdal,  Gunnar.  1969.  "Den  mjuka  staten  i  underutvecklade  länder."  In  U-hjälp  i  utveckling, 

ed. G. Myrdal. Stockholm: Wahlström & Widstrand. 

Nichols, Philip M., George J. Siedel, and Matthew Kasdin. 2004. "Corruption as a Pan-Cultural 
Phenomenon: An Empirical Study in Countries at Opposite Ends of the Former Soviet 
Empire." Texas Journal of International Law 39 (2):215-36. 

Norris, Pippa.  2012.  Democratic  Governance  and  Human  Security: The  Impact of  Regimes  on 

Prosperity, Welfare and Peace. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

North,  Douglass  C.  1990.  Institutions,  Institutional  Change  and  Economic  Performance.  Cam-

bridge: Cambridge University Press. 

———. 1998. "Where have we been and where are we going?" In Economics, Values and Or-
ganization, ed. A. Ben-Ner and L. Putterman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

 

31 

North, Douglass C., John J. Wallis, and Barry R. Weingast. 2009. Violence and social orders : a 
conceptual framework for interpreting recorded human history. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Offe, Claus. 2009. "Governance: An "Empty Signifier"?" Constellations 16 (4):550-61. 
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Ac-

tion. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Ott,  Jan  C.  2010.  "Good  Governance  and  Happiness  in  Nations:  Technical  Quality  Precedes 

Democracy and Quality Beats Size." Journal of Happiness Studies 11 (3):353-68. 

Parijs, Philippe van. 2011. Just democracy : the rawls-machiavelli programme. Colchester: ECPR 

press. 

Persson,  Anna,  Bo  Rothstein,  and  Jan  Teorell.  2013. "Why  Anti-Corruption  Reforms  Fail:  Sys-
temic Corruption as a Collective Action Problem."  Governance: An International Jour-
nal of Policy, Administration and Institutions forthcoming. 

Pierre,  Jon. 2000.  Debating  governance  :  authority, steering,  and  democracy. Oxford:  Oxford 

University Press. 

Pierre, Jon, and B. Guy Peters. 2005. Governing complex societies : trajectories and scenarios. 

Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan. 

———. 2009. Handbook of Public Administration. 
Pierre, Jon, and Guy B. Peters. 2000. Governance, politics and the state. Basingstoke and New 

York: Macmillan. 

Pierre, Jon, and Bo Rothstein. 2011. "Reinventing Weber. The Role of Institutions in Creating 
Social Trust." In The Ashgate Research Companion to New Public Management, ed. T. 
Christensen and P. Laegreid. Burlington: Ashgate. 

Popovski, Vesselin, and G. Shabbir Cheema. 2010. Engaging Civil Society : Emerging Trends in 

Democratic Governance: United Nations University Press. 

Rawls, John. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
———. 2005. Political Liberalism (expanded edition). New York: Columbia University Press. 
Rodrik,  Dani.  2007.  One  Economics,  Many  Recipes:  Globalization,  Institutions  and  Economic 

Growth. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 

Rothstein,  Bo.  1998.  Just  Institutions  Matter:  The  Moral  and  Political  Logic  of  the  Universal 

Welfare State. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

———.  2009.  "Creating  Political  Legitimacy:  Electoral  Democracy  versus  Quality  of  Govern-

ment." American Behavioral Scientist 53 (3):311-30. 

———.  2011a.  "Creating  a  Sustainable  Solidaristic  Society:  A  Manual  ".  Gothenburg  (QoG 
Working  Paper  2011:7):  The  Quality  of  Government  Institute,  University  of  Gothen-
burg. 

———.  2011b.  The  Quality  of  Government: Corruption,  Social  Trust  and  Inequality  in  a  Com-

parative Perspective. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 

———. 2012a. "Good Governance." In The Oxford Handbook of Good Governance, ed. D. Levi-

Faur. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

———.  2012b.  "Quality  of  Government  and  Epistemic  Democracy."  Revista  Latinoamericana 

de Política Comparada 6:11-30. 

Rothstein, Bo, and Dietlind Stolle. 2008. "The State and Social Capital: An Institutional Theory 

of Generalized Trust." Comparative Politics 40:441-67. 

 

32 

Rothstein, Bo, and Jan Teorell. 2008. "What is Quality of Government: A Theory of Impartial 
Political  Institutions."  Governance-an  International  Journal  of  Policy,  Administration 
and Institutions 21 (2):165-90. 

———. 2012. "Defining and measuring quality of government." In Good Government: The Rel-
evance of Political Science, ed. S. Holmberg and B. Rothstein. Cheltenham: Edward El-
gar. 

Schedler, Andreas. 2010. "Concept Formation in Political Science." Mexico City: CIDE. 
Sen, Amartya. 1979. "Equality of what?". Stanford, CA: The Tanner Lecture of Human Values. 
———. 2009. The idea of justice. London: Allen Lane an imprint of Penguin books. 
———. 2011. "Quality of Life: India vs. China." New York Review of Books LVIII (2011:25):44-7. 
Serra, Narcis, and Joesph E. Stiglitz, eds. 2008.  The Washington Consensus Reconsidered. To-

wards a New Global Governance. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Shirley, Mary M. 2005. "Institutions and Development." In Handbook of Institutional Econom-

ics, ed. C. Menard and M. M. Shirley. Amsterdam: Springer. 

Smith, B. C. 2007. Good Governance and Development. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sneath, David. 2006. "Transacting and enacting corruption, obligation and the use of money in 

Mongolia." Ethnos 71 (1):89-122. 

Stone, Peter. 2011. The Luck of the Draw. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Svallfors, Stefan. 2012. "Government quality, egalitarianism, and attitudes to taxes and social 
spending: a European comparison." European Political Science Review (online preview). 

Tebble, Adam James. 2002. "What is the Politics of Difference." Political Theory 30 (2):259-81. 
Teorell,  Jan.  2009.  "The  Impact  of  Quality  of  Government  as  Impartiality:  Theory  and  Evi-
dence." Gothenburg: The Quality of Government Institute, University of Gothenburg. 
Working Paper 2009:25. 

———.  2010.  Determinants  of  Democratization:  Explaining  Regime  Change  in  the  World, 

1972–2002. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (forthcoming). 

Torfing,  Jacob,  B.  Guy  Peters,  Jon  Pierre,  and  Eva  Sorensen.  2012.  Interactive  governance  : 

advancing the paradigm. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Tyler, Tom R. 1992. Why People Obey the Law. New ed ed. New Haven: Yale U.P. 
Wenar, Leif. 2012. "John Rawls." In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. E. N. Zalta. Stan-

ford. 

Werner, Cynthia. 2000. "Gifts, bribes and development in post-Soviet Kazakstan." Human Or-

ganization 59 (1):11-22. 

Widmalm, Sten. 2005. "Explaining Corruption a the Village Level and Indivudual Level in India." 

Asian Survey XLV (5):756-76. 

———.  2008.  Decentralisation,  corruption  and  social  capital  :  from  India  to  the  West.  Thou-

sand Oaks: SAGE Publications. 

Wildavsky, Aaron. 1973. "If planning is everything, maybe it's nothing." 4 2 (127-153). 
Wolff, Jonathan. 2011. Ethics and public policy : a philosophical inquiry. Milton Park, Abingdon, 

Oxon ; New York: Routledge. 

Young, Iris M. 1990. Justice and the Politics of Difference. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Zakaria, Fareed. 2003. The future of freedom : illiberal democracy at home and abroad. 1. ed. 

New York: W. W. Norton & Co. 

 

33 

