Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

Consumers and new
food technologies

Fanny Rollin, Jean Kennedy and
Josephine Wills*
European Food Information Council (EUFIC),
Tassel House, Rue Paul-Emile Janson 6, 1000, Brussels,
Belgium (Tel.: D32 2 506 89 89; fax: D32 2 506 89 80;
e-mail: jo.wills@euﬁc.org)

This paper aims to describe the current landscape in Europe
within which emerging food technologies are developed and
applied, and to give insights from other parts of the world. Con-
sumers’ attitudes towards emerging food technologies are de-
scribed, with a focus on ﬁve case-studies; nanotechnology,
genetic modiﬁcation, nutrigenomics, food irradiation and animal
cloning. Stakeholders’ opinions speciﬁcally on nanotechnology
are also discussed taking into account a recent European consul-
tation. The factors that shape consumers’ views such as percep-
tions, knowledge and information, trust and socio-demographic
attributes that inﬂuence consumers’ views, are also included.

Introduction

The last two decades have seen considerable research
and development efforts dedicated to new food technolo-
gies. The “Flavr Savr” tomato (the ﬁrst genetically modi-
ﬁed (GM) food developed in 1994) and the birth of Dolly
the sheep (the ﬁrst mammal to be cloned from an adult so-
matic cell developed in 1996) are some of the well-known
examples that gave rise to much debate and controversy in
the media when they were ﬁrst developed. Nowadays, con-
sumers are exposed to several applications of emerging
technologies such as GM maize in Spain and irradiated
poultry meat in the Netherlands. However, even if a variety
of food ingredients and food contact materials derived from
new food technologies are already available in some Euro-
pean countries, the application is at an early stage and is
widely expected to grow.

One of the reasons for such interest in new food technol-
ogies is the anticipated range of beneﬁts they can bring to

* Corresponding author.
0924-2244/$ - see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2010.09.001

Review

the consumer and the food sector. The reported advantages
include safer, healthier more nutritious foods using less en-
ergy, water and chemicals and producing less waste. How-
ever,
likelihood of
exposure and risk to consumers from some new food tech-
nologies are largely unknown (Chaudhry et al., 2008).

the toxicological nature of hazard,

The ﬁrst part of this paper is concerned with consumers’
awareness and attitudes towards new food technologies in
general. Since consumers’ reactions to new food technolo-
gies are not a one-dimensional relationship, several aspects
of this relationship are also explored such as risk-beneﬁt
perceptions, knowledge and information, trust and socio-
demographic attributes. The second part will focus on
ﬁve case studies, namely nanotechnology, genetic modiﬁca-
tion, nutrigenomics, food irradiation and animal cloning.
There is a particular emphasis on nanotechnology, and
European stakeholders’ opinions from a recent open con-
sultation on nanotechnology are presented. This paper con-
cludes with a discussion about
the opportunity for
stakeholders and policy-makers to involve the public in
the new food technology debate and the potential for effec-
tive food risk/beneﬁt communication. This paper should be
considered as a general overview of the current research on
this topic and not as an exhaustive literature review.

Emerging food technologies

In Europe, the use of novel foods or novel food ingredi-
ents and their placing on the market within the Community
was ﬁrst deﬁned by the Regulation (EC) No 258/97. In this
legislation, novel foods or food ingredients are deﬁned as
foods or ingredients containing or produced from geneti-
cally modiﬁed organisms (GMOs); with a new or intention-
ally modiﬁed primary molecular structure; consisting of or
isolated from micro-organisms, fungi or algae, plants or an-
imals not obtained by traditional propagating or breeding
practices and having a history of safe food use; and foods
and food ingredients to which has been applied a production
process not currently used, where that process gives rise to
signiﬁcant changes in their composition or structure. A se-
ries of additional legislations completed the Regulation
(EC) No 258/97; among them Regulation (EC) No 1852/
2001 determines how certain information will be made ac-
cessible to the public. Since 2003, the authorisation and
marketing of GMOs or products derived from GMOs
doesn’t fall under the Regulation (EC) No 258/97 anymore,
but must be approved under Regulation EC No 1829/2003

100

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

concerning traceability and labelling. In January 2008, the
European Commission published a proposal (COM(2007)
872) for a new Regulation to harmonise rules on novel
foods and food ingredients (Aprea, 2009).

Consumers’ attitudes

to

be

tend

European

consumers

risk-adverse
(Eurobarometer, 2006a; Nelson, 2001). In 1988, consumers
were sensitised by the initial mismanagement of the BSE
crisis, where they were wrongly reassured that beef was
safe when it was not, and the subsequent mismanagement
of the Belgian dioxin crisis in the same year further focused
their attention food safety issues. It has been reported that
past episodes of food safety incidents such as these have
led to low public conﬁdence in food safety systems
(Curtis, McCluskey, & Wahl, 2004; Frewer & Salter,
2002; Verbeke, Viaene, & Guiot, 1999). However, since
1999, many measures have been taken to ensure food safety
across EU Member States. For example, the European Food
Safety Authority (EFSA) was set up in 2002 and an entire
new raft of legislation known as the “hygiene package” was
created to merge, harmonise and simplify the very detailed
and complex hygiene requirements which were previously
scattered over 17 EU Directives.

Despite efforts to ensure public conﬁdence in food
safety, some new technologies, regardless of their potential
beneﬁts, can have difﬁculty in diffusing successfully into
society (Ronteltap & van Trijp, 2007). In the past, several
new food technologies faced unsupportive attitudes when
they ﬁrst appeared, such as canned food, pasteurised
milk, artiﬁcial insemination of farm animals, microwave
cooking (IFT, 2000). A recent review commissioned by
the Food Standards Agency (FSA)
in the UK (Fell,
Wilkins, Kivinen, Austin, & Fernandez, 2009) conﬁrmed
that nowadays European consumers still tend to associate
more negative than positive attributes to agro-biotechnol-
ogy in general, such as wariness, unease and uncertainty.
However, there are minorities with strongly positive or neg-
ative opinions, and a majority who are undecided or feel
that they don’t know enough to form a view.

Given the intimate relationship people have with food, ed-
ucation about the technical and rational aspects of emerging
food technologies alone will not lead to consumer accep-
tance (Bruhn, 2008; Bruhn & Mason, 2002). Many factors
can inﬂuence consumers’ acceptance of food innovations.
Understanding consumers’ risk-beneﬁt perceptions, socio-
demographic attributes, knowledge and information, as
well as trust in the source of information will be crucial to
the realisation and success of technological advances.

Inﬂuencing factors
Risk-beneﬁt perceptions

Consumer acceptance is driven by risk perception rather
than the technical
risk estimates provided by experts
(Frewer, Howard, & Aaron, 1998) and food technologies
typically possess many of the risk characteristics that

engender greatest concern among consumers (Ronteltap,
van Trijp, Renes, & Frewer, 2007). Research demonstrated
that factors such as whether the risk is perceived to be in-
voluntary, unnatural or potentially catastrophic,
and
whether the risk may affect health rather than the environ-
ment, drive public risk perception (Gaskell, 2000; Siegrist,
Stampﬂi, Kastenholz, & Keller, 2008). Consumers also per-
ceive a hazard as riskier when they believe that the conse-
quences of the hazard are largely unknown to scientiﬁc
experts (e.g. Slovic, 1987), particularly when the public
perceives that the uncertainty is being ‘‘hidden’’ by regula-
tory institutions (van Kleef et al., 2006).

Acceptance of a technology is also partly driven by the
perception of the potential beneﬁts (Ronteltap et al., 2007).
A lack of perceived beneﬁts leads the majority of people to
question the need for, and usefulness of, novel food tech-
nologies, and may even accentuate perceived risks and
moral concerns (Gaskell, 2000).

Socio-demographic and economic factors

Women are more concerned, less positive, and likely to
perceive fewer beneﬁts of novel food technologies than
men (Eurobarometer, 2005; Fell et al., 2009). In general,
students and young people have positive perceptions to bio-
technologies (Eurobarometer, 2005).

According to two recent reviews, general attitudes may
also be one of the key drivers of attitudes towards novel
food technologies, which is pertinent in cases of uncer-
tainty and low understanding (Fell et al., 2009; Ronteltap
et al., 2007).

Moral and ethical worries can also affect the level of
acceptance of new technologies. In relation to biotechnol-
ogies,
they refer principally to technology “tampering
with nature”, making irreversible changes to nature and
‘playing god’ (Hallman & Condry, 2006). For one in three
EU citizens, moral and ethical issues should be prioritised
in
technologies
(Eurobarometer, 2005, 2006a). Europeans are likely to dis-
count risk, if they perceive the technology to be both useful
and morally acceptable.

decision-making

regarding

food

Price, good taste and convenience are suggested to be
key consumer beneﬁts in today’s marketplace (Bruhn,
2008; Fell et al., 2009). A British study highlighted that
a majority of UK consumers (74.5%) seems to be willing
to purchase GM foods if they are cheaper than traditional
foods (Spence & Townsend, 2006). A recent survey showed
that almost two-thirds of US consumers (67%) indicated
they would be likely to purchase a biotechnology modiﬁed
product with improved ﬂavour (Bruhn, 2008). Another
American study underlined that over 80% of consumers in-
dicate convenience is an important consideration in pur-
chases (Food Marketing Institute, 2005).

Knowledge

New technologies often encounter a stumbling block in
the consumers’ acceptance

consumer acceptance. Will

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

101

change if
technologies?

they receive more information about

these

The evidence regarding the effects of new knowledge is
mixed, with some studies ﬁnding that new information has
no signiﬁcant effect, and others ﬁnding positive or negative
effects of new information. Among others, Bauer, Allum,
and Miller (2007) pointed out that knowledge transfer to
the public does not guarantee more positive attitudes to-
wards technology and science. However, it has been shown
that a lack of knowledge among consumers regarding inno-
vative and emerging food technologies can serve as a major
barrier to their acceptance (Cardello, Schutz, & Lesher,
2007). People are most suspicious of the least familiar tech-
nologies (Fell et al., 2009). A recent American study
showed that greater self-rated knowledge of a technology
is mostly associated with positive attitudes about that tech-
nology (Teisl, Fein, & Levy, 2009). In addition, it seems
that educating consumers about new technologies may be
critical to ensure that they will pay extra for such products
(Costa-Font, Gil, & Traill, 2008; Hicks et al., 2009).

dealing

Over the last 5 years, there has been increased atten-
tion on new food technologies, particularly on GM
food. From January 2005 to October 2009, European con-
sumers have been exposed to more than 10,000 media ar-
ticles
articles),
nanotechnologies (1531 articles), irradiation (634), nutri-
genomics (220) or animal cloning (120) applications in
data-
the food sector (EUFIC study based on Factiva
base). Considering that media interest in these technolo-
gies has increased over the last 5 years, what
is the
impact on consumers’ views?

GMOs

(7300

with

Ò

Bauer, Kohring, Gutteling, and Allansdottir (2001) con-
sider that media can have a “direct effect” on consumer risk
perceptions and attitudes and inﬂuence people’s negative
emotions and perception of risks by dramatising the reality.
This can result from selective information processing,
whereby individuals seek out and confer greater value to in-
formation reporting risks. Although the content of media
reporting is important, the quantity of coverage can also
have an impact. A European review focusing on the UK
and Sweden underlined that public acceptance to controver-
sial technologies varies in accordance with the volume of
reporting, even if the overall
tone is mostly positive
(Rowe, Frewer, & Sjo¨berg, 2000).

Trust in the source of information

has

In Europe, the most trusted sources of information are
health professionals, university scientists, and consumer or-
ganisations, followed by scientists working in industry, and
media (Eurobarometer, 2006a). Consumer trust towards in-
dustry
period
1999e2005. A speciﬁcity of the European community is
that European Union government is more trusted than na-
tional government on regulation (Eurobarometer, 2006a).
However, a recent Eurobarometer study on risk issues
(Eurobarometer, 2006b) showed that European consumers

consistently

increased

over

the

have different trusted sources when asked who they would
trust the most to inform you about a serious food risk
(Table 1). In general, the 10 new EU members included
in 2005 have greater trust in actors and institutions involved
in science and technology. Compared to European con-
sumers, US and Chinese population have higher levels of
(Curtis et al., 2004; Gaskell,
trust
Ten Eyck, Jackson, & Veltri, 2005; Hicks et al., 2009).

regulator

in their

Labelling

Labelling aims to provide additional information about
the technology and its beneﬁts to raise awareness and im-
prove transparency. Labelling can also assist in increasing
individual perception of personal control over the consump-
tion of new food products (Costa-Font et al., 2008). When
asked about the need of labelling on food products derived
from an emerging food technology,
studies
highlight that consumers and stakeholders support the pres-
ence of more and clearer labels (Curtis et al., 2004;
Eurobarometer, 2008; Frewer et al., 2004; Landmark
Europe, 2009). People are inclined to accept the risk of
consuming new food products, if it is under their own con-
trol. This may explain why they prefer clear labelling and
increased regulation.

recent

However, labelling of GMO content in foods can nega-
tively impact on the intention to purchase a product. In par-
ticular, extensive GMO information on the label does not
have a positive inﬂuence on consumers’ intentions to buy.
The consumers most likely to be willing to buy GM foods
are those who desire the lowest level of information on the
label possibly because there is a lack of awareness behind
consumers willingness to purchase GM products (according
to the attitude activation model). Consumers with lower
awareness of GM foods may be less concerned about
GMO content of food products, but negatively inﬂuenced
by extensive label
information (O’Fallon, Gursoy, &
Swanger, 2007).

Case studies

The acceptance of emerging food technology varies
depending on the technology and across the EU Member
States (Gaskell, 2000), so that in-depth understanding of
the relationship between the consumer and one speciﬁc
technology should be tackled on a case-by-case basis. In

Table 1. Most trusted source of information for European con-
sumers (Eurobarometer, 2006b). Question: Who would you trust
the most to inform you about a serious food risk in ﬁsh or chicken?

Most trusted source

Countries

Physician or doctor
Consumer groups

Scientists

Media

Belgium, France, Malta, Spain
Germany, Hungary, Luxembourg, The
Netherlands
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Greece, Poland,
Slovakia, Sweden
Ireland, Slovenia

102

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

Case study 1: Nanotechnologies

Up to now, there are no generally accepted deﬁnitions of nanomaterials and no speciﬁc overarching regulation about nano-
technology, as the current legislation covers in principle the potential health, safety and environmental risks in relation to
nanomaterials. Despite that, a number of studies have been performed on attitudes towards nanotechnology, considering
the generally accepted deﬁnition; “the term nanomaterials is used here to indicate engineered materials which contain struc-
tures of less than 100 nm for at least one dimension. These materials include free nanoparticles as well as nanomaterials that
are attached to or incorporated into the matrix of larger structures. Naturally occurring and unintentionally produced nano-
materials are not included in this deﬁnition” (Dekkers et al., 2006).

A series of communications from the European institutions have been published on nanotechnologies to propose an
integrated strategy in Europe (COM(2004)338), to deﬁne an action plan for 2005e2009 (COM(2008)366) and to out-
line the potential food safety risks related to nanotechnology (EFSA opinion on the Potential Risks Arising from Nano-
science and Nanotechnologies on Food and Feed Safety).

i. Stakeholders opinions

A broad stakeholders survey (Landmark Europe, 2009) evaluated the opinion of industry representatives, scientiﬁc
experts, policy makers, consumer groups, NGO representatives and journalists. This study suggested that stakeholder
awareness of nanotechnology is relatively high (62% of the respondents reported having heard ’a lot’ or ‘some’
about nanotechnology), while the actual knowledge of nanotechnology is modest (70% claimed to know ‘little’ or
‘less than little’ about nanotechnology). Similar to consumers, nanotechnology is not yet ’top of mind’, but is
a growing consumer policy concern. Stakeholders display a high level of concern (60%) about nanotechnology, in
particular about the adequacy of current risk assessment requirements for nanotechnology, and 43% believe that the
overall potential risks of nanotechnology will outweigh the beneﬁts.

A recent European stakeholder consultation (DG Health and Consumers, 2009) showed the views of 16 NGOs on
nanotechnologies, which complemented those of consumers. Indeed, NGOs recommend public participation in
decision-making. As the public is sceptical regarding nanotechnologies, NGOs suggest that the risks and beneﬁts
must be communicated to the public and not only to the scientists. NGOs asked for more transparency (e.g.
mandatory reporting scheme, public inventory of all current and forthcoming nanomaterials used in products on the
market), more precautionary risk management of products with nanotechnology elements (from no further market
introduction management to a ban/moratorium on production and marketing of these products), and case-by-case
risk evaluation and a labelling system to indicate the presence of manufactured nanomaterials/particles. Moreover,
some NGOs called for a standard deﬁnition and new regulation of nanotechnologies. Concerning research and risk
assessment studies, standard methods and the ban of animal testing were suggested.

ii. Consumers attitudes

Consumers awareness of nanotechnology speciﬁcally is low (Chaudhry et al., 2008; EORG, 2001; Siegrist et al., 2008).
In 2005, 44% of Europeans had heard about nanotechnology (Eurobarometer, 2006a). European acceptance seems to be
increasing. In 2002, only 29% agreed on the future positive impact of nanotechnology, and 53% answered ‘don’t know’
(Gaskell et al., 2005), while in 2005, almost half (48%) considered that nanotechnology will have positive effects on
their way of life in the next 20 years (Eurobarometer, 2005). Over half of Europeans (55%) support the development of
nanotechnology as they perceived this technology as useful to society and morally acceptable (Eurobarometer, 2006a).
In particular, the use of nanotechnology in packaging seems to be more acceptable than the use of nanotechnology in
food (Siegrist, Cousin, Kastenholz, & Wiek, 2007; Siegrist et al., 2008).

In 2002, US consumers were more optimistic about nanotechnology (50% optimistic) than Europeans (29% optimistic).
However, by 2005, European, US and Canadian citizens were equally optimistic about nanotechnology. Europeans were
more concerned about the impact of nanotechnology on the environment and were less conﬁdent in regulation than
North Americans (Gaskell et al., 2005).

iii. Risk-beneﬁt perceptions

Among consumers, the main perceived risks seem to be the fear of the unknown (Landmark Europe, 2009) and of
playing god (Macoubrie, 2005), as well as the ability of regulators and others to ensure safety and the general
public beneﬁts (Smallman & Nieman, 2006).

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

103

iv. Socio-demographic factors

Women are less optimistic than men (33% vs 49%), and slightly less supportive (53% vs 59%) (Eurobarometer, 2006a).
However, these conclusions should be addressed cautiously as the proportion of ‘don’t know’ answers is always higher
for women than it is for men, reaching almost half of those women surveyed about their optimism (up to 49% in some
cases, e.g. Eurobarometer, 2005). One exception is that males are not inclined to have a genetic test for personalised
nutrition (Stewart-Knox et al., 2009).
In a Eurobarometer survey, respondents are categorised into four age groups: 15e25 years, 26e45 years, 46e65 years,
and 66 years and above. The oldest group seem to be less supportive (only 14% of the 66 years and above group totally
agree to support nanotechnology, versus 21%, 20% and 22% for the 15e25 years, 26e45 years, 46e65 years groups,
respectively) about nanotechnologies (Eurobarometer, 2006a). Siegrist et al. (2008) suggested that age is not
a signiﬁcant inﬂuencing factor of risk perception of the nanotechnology applications in food and packaging, but
older people are more likely than other age groups to perceive nanotechnologies used in food packaging as beneﬁcial.

It seems that religion may play a role in inﬂuencing consumer behaviour and in a 2005 study, it was found that religious
people were less likely to think that beneﬁts of nanotechnology outweigh the risks (Fam, Waller, & Erdogan, 2004; Lee,
Scheufele, & Lewenstein, 2005).

v. Labelling

Most European stakeholders (70%) ask for the labelling of food products derived from nanotechnology and it has been
reported that acceptance of nanotechnology could beneﬁt from the provision of more consumer information and aware-
ness-raising (Landmark Europe, 2009). However, labelling of food products derived from nanotechnology remains
difﬁcult, as no consensus has been established on the deﬁnition of nanoparticles. Furthermore, with the multiplicity
of labels on food products, it remains unknown how consumers will make sense of them, and how they will make
trade-offs with other information on label.

genetic modiﬁcation,

this section, ﬁve novel food technologies are considered;
nanotechnology,
nutrigenomics,
food irradiation, animal cloning. It should be noted that
there is not the same amount of material available for the
ﬁve technologies; this can be partly explained by the fact
that more studies were performed on the less recent tech-
nologies and on the technologies with applications avail-
able on the market.

Conclusion & recommendations

This paper shows that many factors affect consumer at-
titudes and acceptance of novel food technologies and their
applications. Whilst waiting for a full understanding of
these technologies, some actions can be taken to increase
public awareness and acceptance. Understanding consumer
perceptions and the role of socio-demographic attributes on
the acceptance of new technologies are key for policy-
makers to formulate meaningful regulations, particularly
in Europe where opinions vary considerably across coun-
tries. Stakeholders also need to explore more deeply what
affects public trust in food sectors, government, and in re-
lated policy-inﬂuencers like industry, scientists, NGOs,
and journalists (Houghton, Van Kleef, Rowe, & Frewer,
2006; Ten Eyck & Gaskell, 2003). Furthermore, public con-
ﬁdence in food safety has important economic and political
consequences
level
(Houghton et al., 2006).

and international

at

a national

In the past, the public was perceived as a passive re-
ceiver of risk and beneﬁt information and was considered
to often misunderstand or misinterpret messages. It is now
recognised that risk and beneﬁt communication should in-
volve a process of exchange of information among all
stakeholders (Rogers-Hayden, Mohr, & Pidgeon, 2007).
Indeed, these technologies are complex concepts for the
public to grasp. Without a serious communication effort,
these innovations could face a negative public reception.
European consumers are risk-averse and demand transpar-
ency. Increased communication and early involvement of
end-users may contribute signiﬁcantly to an increased
transparency of the decision-making process and a higher
level of trust in public authorities (WHO, 2006), as well as
the likelihood of market success (Frewer et al., 2004).

However, food risk communication is a highly complex
ﬁeld, where no single set of recommendations can suit all
situations. Many factors may affect its success, including
trust in the source of information, scientiﬁc uncertainty, in-
teraction with the public, cultural variation, as well as how
the message is developed in terms of language, style and
pre-testing with target audiences (e.g. choice of appropriate
channels for reaching target audiences) (van Dijk et al.,
2008; van Kleef et al., 2007; Smillie & Blissett, 2010).
A recent report on the results of two workshops with inter-
national experts and an open web-based consultation on

104

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

Case study 2: GMOs

The World Health Organisation deﬁnes genetically modiﬁed organisms (GMOs) as “organisms in which the genetic ma-
terial (DNA) has been altered in a way that does not occur naturally. It allows selected individual genes to be transferred
from one organism into another, also between non-related species.” (WHO, 2009).

The European Union maintained a long “de facto” moratorium against the importation of GM food that ended in
2005. At present, Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 on GM food and feed lays down the general framework for reg-
ulating GM food and feed in the Community. The Regulation is complemented by Regulations (EC) No 1830/2003
and 65/2004 that ensures trace ability and labelling of GMOs at all stages of placing on the market, including the
possibility of establishing thresholds. In summer 2009, an evaluation of the EU legislative framework in the ﬁeld
of GM food and feed is in progress and the results are expected for summer 2010. Among others, the socio-
economic impact of GMOs (food and feed prices/consumer perception), consumer acceptance as well as the over-
all impact of the current labelling system and the GM free labelling schemes are some of the key issues that will
be assessed.

i. Consumer attitudes

The levels of awareness of novel food technologies are generally low for consumers in Europe, except for GMOs. In
a recent Eurobarometer study on public attitudes to various aspects of biotechnology (Eurobarometer, 2005), 80% of
consumers in Europe reported that they were familiar with GM foods.

Despite this high level of awareness, the same Eurobarometer survey revealed that 73% of EU citizens were not favour-
ably disposed to GM (Eurobarometer, 2005). The acceptance of GM technology varies depending on their application
(Eurobarometer, 2006a). Although GM medicines are widely accepted, there is apprehension about both GM crops and
GM foods. Moreover, consumers have been found to be less likely to accept genetic modiﬁcation to food products that
they considered to be natural or healthy (Costa-Font et al., 2008) and more accepting of GM technologies using plant
based products rather than animal based products (Onyango & Rodolfo, 2004).

According to Costa-Font et al. (2008), the European population is found to be broadly more tolerant to GM food in
Southern European countries, such as Spain, Malta, Portugal and Italy, as compared to France or the Nordic
population. French consumers are considered to be resistant to change and in Nordic countries, consumers ﬁnd
beneﬁts associated with GM food as insufﬁcient to overcome their associated (perceived) risk. The results about the
optimistic countries are in line with a previous Eurobarometer survey on biotechnology; and to a lesser extent for
the Nordic countries (Eurobarometer, 2006a).

US consumers exhibit a more favourable and trusting attitude towards GM technology than Europeans. US consumers
consider GM products that exhibit clear-cut beneﬁts are acceptable and they are less willing to pay a premium for non-
GM food than Europeans (Costa-Font et al., 2008). Although US consumers preferred non-GM products, they have
recently voted against proposals that would prohibit the use of genetically modiﬁed inputs, and so did the company
stakeholders (House, Morrow, Lusk & Moore, 2001).

Developing countries tend to have positive attitudes to novel food technologies, in particular towards GM (Hoban,
2004). For example, Chinese consumers are willing to pay a premium for GM foods (McCluskey, Grimsrud, &
Wahl, 2006). This positive attitude can be explained by greater perceived beneﬁts (due to more urgent needs in
terms of food availability and nutritional content, and the opportunity to be competitive in world markets), and
lower perceived levels of
regulation, positive perceptions of scientiﬁc
discovery, and positive media inﬂuences) (Curtis et al., 2004; Huang, Qiu, Bai, & Pray, 2006; McCluskey
et al., 2006).

risk (due to trust

in government

ii. Risk-beneﬁt perception of GMOs

The perception of risks and beneﬁts of GMOs vary across Europe. According to a Eurobarometer study, 62% of Euro-
peans convey that they are worried about GM products in food and drinks (very worried: 25% and fairly worried: 37%)
but Greece (81%), Italy (77%) and Cyprus (76%) have the highest concerns about genetically modiﬁed products in food
or drinks. The only three countries where less than half of consumers report that they are worried are; the Netherlands
(42%), Finland and Sweden (46% in both) (Eurobarometer, 2006b).

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

105

The main perceived risks about GM food are development of super-weeds, unintended effects on human health and the
environment (“tampering with nature”), the potential irreversibility of any negative impact, unnaturalness, and the lack
of animal welfare (CONSUMERCHOICE, 2008; Frewer et al., 2004; Uzogara, 2000).

The highest valued GM-associated beneﬁts are the improvement in shelf-life and nutritional quality, the enhanced ﬂa-
vour modiﬁcation followed by enhanced nutritional value and pesticide reduction (Loureiro & Bugbee, 2005; Uzogara,
2000). However, consumers make a distinction between the direct beneﬁts for the individual consumers, such as health
beneﬁts, and beneﬁts to society more broadly such as environmental beneﬁts (Ronteltap et al., 2007). Despite the
reported beneﬁts of GM crops to farmers and the environment, these beneﬁts are not perceived by most consumers
as being advantageous to them (Batista & Oliveira, 2009) and overall the perceived risks outweigh the perceived
beneﬁts (Eurobarometer, 2006a).

iii. Socio-demographic factors

Mixed results were found on the impact of socio-demographic attributes on consumers’ acceptance to GM foods (Costa-
Font et al., 2008). In general, it seems that women and older people are less likely to accept GM foods in Europe and in
the US, but not in Canada (Eurobarometer, 2006a; Grimsrud, McCluskey, Loureiro, & Wahl, 2002; McCluskey et al.,
2006).

According to a recent review, there is no consensus on the role of religion and moral and ethical considerations on con-
sumers’ acceptance of nanotechnologies (Costa-Font et al., 2008).

iv. Knowledge

Education was demonstrated to have a positive impact on consumers’ willingness to purchase GM food in Norway, but
a negative impact in Canada, Japan and China, and no effect in the US (McCluskey et al., 2006). On the other hand,
providing information on the beneﬁts of these technologies was suggested to have a direct and positive inﬂuence on
consumer perception and helped to reduce public perception of risk from GM applications (Costa-Font et al., 2008).

v. Trust

Consumer organisations, environmental groups and scientists seem to be more trustworthy than the biotech industry and
government about GMOs, across Europe (Bredahl, Grunert, & Frewer, 1998), the US (Onyango, Ferdaus, Hallman,
Schilling, & Adelajan, 2003; Savadori et al., 2004) and Canada (Veeman, Adamowicz & Hu, 2005).

vi. Labelling

Over the world, consumers would like to see more labels on GM products (Curtis et al., 2004; Frewer et al., 2004). In
Europe, the European Union has imposed mandatory labelling on GM foods to ensure trace ability and labelling of
GMOs at all stages of placing on the market (Regulation (EC) No 1830/2003). A “GM-free” label is quite common
in some countries (e.g. Poland, Germany) but prohibited in others (e.g. The Netherlands). Even if labelling is demanded
by consumers, few of them actually look at the labels when buying food and most shoppers do not actively avoid GM-
labelled products (CONSUMERCHOICE, 2008).

communication outreach in nanotechnology, highlighted
several recommendations to improve communication on
nanotechnology (Burnet et al., 2008). First, population
and stakeholders should be divided into different groups
(young people, scientists, journalists, NGOs, business/in-
dustry and policy-marker) and targeted with tailored mes-
sages. Then, a hands-on approach should be developed,
based on for example the cooperation model of school-sci-
ence museum-labs. Different channels and methods (e.g.
website, festivals, exhibition, commercialisation-like tech-
niques), should be used to generate dialogue and guarantee

the engagement of policy makers. Any promoting interven-
tion should involve passionate people to develop imagina-
tive ways to allow citizens to experience nanotechnology
and foster communication from applications, beneﬁts and
risks.

Effective communication should also highlight what has
been done to mitigate risks. Providing information about en-
forcement of food risk control, food safety laws and regula-
tions is likely to increase perceptions of control, which in
turn may decrease negative risk perceptions (van Dijk
et al., 2008). Moreover, public perception that authorities

106

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

Case study 3: Nutrigenomics

Emerging in 2000 as a new ﬁeld of research, scientists predict that nutrigenomics could bring about big changes in how
food is grown, processed and consumed. Nutrigenomics has been deﬁned as ‘understanding how nutrition inﬂuences
metabolism and maintenance of the internal equilibrium in the body, how this regulation is disturbed in the early phase
of a diet related disease, and to what extent the individual genotype contributes to such diseases’ (Mu¨ller & Kersten,
2003). It is usually based on genetic tests and may also be called personalised nutrition.

i. Consumers’ attitudes

A survey performed in six European countries showed that a majority of respondents (66.6%) reported that they would
be willing to undergo genetic testing and 27% to follow a personalised diet. Willingness to undergo genetic testing was
lower in Germany and higher in the UK. Individuals who answered positively were more likely to report a history of
health problems (e.g. high blood cholesterol levels, central obesity, metabolic syndrome) (Stewart-Knox et al., 2009).
These results may encourage stakeholders to target speciﬁc population groups for the development of nutrigenomics
applications. In the US, 21% of the population would be unwilling to undergo a genetic test for any reason (Wang,
Fridinger, Sheedy, & Khoury, 2001).

ii. Risk-beneﬁt perception

Nutrigenomics may raise consumer concerns regarding the impact of human genetics on the integrity of nature, control
over sensitive information to avoid risks of improper use of information (e.g. loss of privacy, employment or insurance,
commercial exploitation of both the information and the technology) (Ronteltap et al., 2007; Stewart-Knox et al., 2009),
and the potential high cost of new functional foods. Canadian research also highlighted that nutrigenomics evoked strong
associations with GMOs (Burgess, 2003), so that nutrigenomics requires speciﬁc attention and careful communication to
consumers.

On the other hand, the beneﬁts of nutrigenomics may be potentially high: maintenance of health (adding health to years),
improving performance (e.g. in sports) and ultimately longevity (adding years to life). Nutrigenomics may contribute to
healthier food consumption and reduction in health-care costs (Ronteltap et al., 2007). However, nutrigenomics will only
contribute to the quality of life of end-users if they are motivated and follow their personalised recommendations on food
intake (Ronteltap & van Trijp, 2007).

iii. Socio-demographic factors

The willingness to undergo genetic testing seems to be lowest among the 55e64 years age group and highest in the over
65 years age group among the European population (Stewart-Knox et al., 2009).

direct their efforts towards preventing the occurrence of
a food safety incident has a greater impact on public trust
in authorities than only managing risks (van Kleef et al.,
2006).

The role of marketing and advertising in communication
strategies for novel food technologies seems to be unex-
plored. Scepticism among consumers towards use of
emerging food technology is probably one reason for this;
industry is reluctant to communicate any messages that
could provoke negative attitudes towards their products.
For example, it has been shown that consumers’ ﬂavour rat-
ings of a product decrease if they are told the product is
produced by a novel technology. Another example is the
use of statements such as “minimally processed” and with
“fewer preservatives”, which have been reported to be neg-
atively viewed by some consumers (Bruhn, 2007).

Naturalness of foods and their processing methods is
recognised to be highly valued by consumers and this is
widely used in advertising campaigns and is considered
to be a determinant for acceptance of new food technolo-
gies (Siegrist, 2008). The most negative effect on perceived
naturalness is seen for GM foods. The least negative effect
is seen for physical transformations.

It has been suggested that tangible consumer beneﬁts
may increase consumers’ purchase intentions to buy prod-
ucts produced by technologies towards which there is
scepticism (Frewer, Howard, Hedderley, & Shepherd,
1997; Siegrist, 2008). Taste, naturalness, convenience,
healthiness, price, environmental and welfare concerns
all have a role to play in consumer food choices and can
be emphasised in marketing and advertising campaigns
industry
as appropriate. Technologies with apparent

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

107

Case study 4: Food irradiation

Food irradiation is a processing technique that exposes food to ionising radiation (electron beams, X-rays or gamma
rays), to kill bacteria that cause food poisoning, to control insect infestation, to delay fruit ripening and to help stop
vegetables from sprouting (FSA, 2009). Irradiation is sometimes referred to as “cold pasteurisation” since the result
achieved is similar to heat-based pasteurisation, but without the heat. Low to medium doses of radiation successfully
reduces bacterial contamination but are not sufﬁcient to affect viruses or toxins. Higher radiation doses are needed to
kill all living contaminants creating sterile foods. Such foods are necessary for people with impaired immunity such
as patients suffering from AIDS or cancer. Food irradiation is used on more than 60 food types in over 40 countries
worldwide (FSAI, 2006).

In terms of legislation, there are two EU Directives (1999/2/EC and 1999/3/EC) relating to irradiated food. Six Member
States have notiﬁed that they maintain national authorisations for certain foods (e.g. ﬁsh, meat or eggs). In 1986, 1992
and 1998 the EU Scientiﬁc Committee on Food (SCF) issued favourable opinions on irradiation of a range of foods as
long as the process was not used to mask a food’s unsuitability for consumption or to cover poor handling practices. A
joint World Health Organisation (WHO), Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) study group convened in 1997 concluded that food irradiated to any dose appropriate to achieve the
intended technological objective was both safe to consume and nutritionally adequate. However, the EU SCF, in an opin-
ion issued in April 2003, recommended that maximum doses of irradiation should continue to be considered for foods on
a case by case basis.

Any irradiated food, or food containing an irradiated ingredient within the EU must carry the word “irradiated” in
a prominent position either as part of the main label or next to the ingredient that has been irradiated. It may also (op-
tionally) show the international icon for irradiated food called the “Radura” symbol.

i. Consumers’ attitude

Public attitudes towards food irradiation are negative (He, Fletcher, & Rimal, 2005a; Cardello et al., 2007). Despite the
fact that the scientiﬁc community recognises food irradiation as a safe and effective process, and extensive education
efforts and endorsements given by many health-related organisations worldwide, signiﬁcant consumer resistance has
slowed down the application of the technology in Europe and in the USA (DeRuiter & Dwyer, 2002; Henson, 1995).

ii. Knowledge

A recent analysis suggested that information about the nature and beneﬁts of food irradiation leads to positive changes in
consumers’ perceptions and buying decisions (Nayga, Aiew, & Nichols, 2005).

iii. Labelling

Any irradiated food or any irradiated food ingredient of a compound food must be labelled with the words ‘irradiated’ or
‘treated with ionising radiation’ (Directive 1999/2/EC) (European Commission, 2007). One in three people stated that
they would consider an ‘irradiated food’ label to be a warning and so would try to avoid the product (He, Fletcher, &
Rimal, 2005b).

et

al.,

1997;

beneﬁts, but with no obvious beneﬁts for consumers, do
not show any positive effect on purchase intention
(Frewer
Søndergaard, Grunert, &
Scholderer, 2005). Taste is the factor consistently rated
highest amongst consumers as a driver for consumption
and repeated purchase of foods. Indeed, improved ﬂavour
was the driving factor behind the introduction of the GM
tomato Flavr Savr. It has been reported that more than
50% of US consumers are willing to purchase GM foods
with improved ﬂavour (Bruhn, 2007). Besides naturalness,
ﬂavour was the strongest factor for willingness to buy for
nanotechnology-processed foods (Siegrist, Stampﬂi, &

Kastenholz, 2009) and GM cheese (Frewer et al., 1997).
Convenience is another important driver for purchase of
foods in general, and it has been described as the most im-
portant motivation for buying minimally processed vege-
tables (Bruhn, 2007). The effect of price on consumer
attitudes towards foods produced by means of new tech-
nologies appears to be of limited importance. For willing-
ness to buy nanotechnology-produced foods, naturalness
and possible health beneﬁts are in comparison much stron-
ger factors (Siegrist et al., 2009). Price is however not
a negligible factor for acceptance of novel food technolo-
gies. For example, it has been reported that a majority of

108

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

Case study 5: Animal cloning

Although it has not been banned, cloning is not a commercial practice in Europe. The European Parliament is
calling for prohibiting the cloning of animals for food supply purposes (RSP 2008/259). If the EU were to legislate
for a ban on food from cloned animals or to introduce labelling for cloned food, it would have to justify measures
to the World Trade Organisation because the European Food Safety Authority has not identiﬁed a food safety
risk associated with it. In the US there has been a voluntary moratorium on the sale of such products since
July 2001.

i. Consumers’ attitude

Animal cloning shares some similarities with GM technology in terms of consumers’ awareness and acceptance. The
knowledge of European citizens on this technology is good, on average (Eurobarometer, 2008; Fell et al., 2009) whilst
their acceptance is low. While the cloning of human cells and tissues is supported, animal cloning is considered as mor-
ally wrong and only one third of European citizens considered it as acceptable, if animal cloning helps to solve world-
wide food problems (Eurobarometer, 2008; Gaskell, 2000).

ii. Trust

Even if no commercial applications are available on the European market, the most trusted source of information on the
safety of cloned animals from a European perspective are scientists (Eurobarometer, 2005).

iii. Labelling

A Eurobarometer survey dedicated to animal cloning showed that eight out of 10 EU citizens (average 83%, from 71%
in Estonia to 94% in Greece) ask for labels if food products from the offspring of cloned animals become available in the
shops (Eurobarometer, 2008).

British consumers are willing to purchase a GM product at
a certain price (Siegrist, 2008).

Irrespective of its merits, it also seems that even the best
intentioned communication can actually have the perverse
effect of creating consumer resistance because it increases
awareness to what might be previously unknown risks
(see for instance Scholderer & Frewer, 2003). One explana-
tion that has been suggested is that the information activates
already existing attitudes, rather than changes them. This is
then manifested in the choice situation. Labels simply stating
“genetically modiﬁed” are unlikely to trigger existing atti-
tudes to any large extent. However, classically designed in-
i.e. material providing pieces of
formation material,
information selected by experts according to what they think
consumers should know, may differ from what the con-
sumers want to know or have concerns about, according to
the “deﬁcit model”. Thus, an alternative approach could be
to develop information material based on consumer needs
and wishes, and thereby increase the chances to convey
a message which positively impacts on attitudes and product
choice (Scholderer & Frewer, 2003). For example, increased
knowledge about food safety, as well as label information on
safety and handling, has been shown to increase consumers’
intention to purchase irradiated meat products (Rimal,
McWatters, Hashim, & Fletcher, 2004).

In conclusion, stakeholders and policy-makers should
adopt a proactive approach towards consumers, combining

appropriate stakeholder forums aimed at tackling the issues
head-on by informing, and public consultation at the early
stage of development (Chaudhry et al., 2008; European
Commission, 2004). Keeping in mind that extensive world-
wide debate over GM foods and related issues hasn’t re-
sulted in consensus over GMOs yet (Batista & Oliveira,
2009), the increase in public acceptance in new technolo-
gies may be a long-term process. When it comes to adver-
tising and marketing to consumers about new technologies,
campaigns that incorporate improved, convenience, natu-
ralness, taste and beneﬁt for the consumer could have a pos-
itive impact on consumers food choice, particularly when
the message is concise and from trusted sources.

References

Aprea, A. (2009). Welcome package on food safety. Requested by

the European Parliament’s Committee on Environment, Public
Health and Food Safety. Brussels: European Parliament. July
2009.

Batista, R., & Oliveira, M. M. (2009). Facts and ﬁction of genetically

engineered food. Trends in Biotechnology, 27(5), 277e286.

Bauer, M. W., Allum, N., & Miller, S. (2007). What have we learnt from
25 years of PUS research e liberating and widening the agenda.
Public Understanding of Science, 15(1), 1e17.

Bauer, M. W., Kohring, M., Gutteling, J., & Allansdottir, A. (2001). The

dramatisation of biotechnology in the elite mass media. In
G. Gaskell, & M. W. Bauer (Eds.), Biotechnology 1996e2000-the
years of controversy (pp. 35e52). London: Science Museum.

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

109

Bredahl, L., Grunert, K. G., & Frewer, L. J. (1998). Consumer atti-
tudes and decision-making with regard to genetically engineered
food products. A review of the literature and a presentation of
models for future research. Journal of Consumer Policy, 21,
251e277.

Bruhn, C. M. (2007). Enhancing consumer acceptance of new pro-

cessing technologies. Innovative Food Science and Emerging
Technologies, 8, 555e558.

Bruhn, C. M. (2008). Consumer acceptance of food innovations.

Innovation: Management. Policy & Practice, 10(1), 91e95.

Bruhn, C. M., & Mason, A. (2002). Community leader response to
educational information about biotechnology. Journal of Food
Science, 67, 399e403.

Burgess, M. M. (2003). Starting on the right foot: Public consultation to

inform issue deﬁnition in genome policy (No. DEG 002). Van-
couver: W. Maurice Young Centre for Applied Ethics.

Burnet, F., Carrada, G., Chicoineau, L., Cremer, S., De Capoa, E.,

Franche, C., et al. (2008). Report from the workshop: communi-
cation outreach in nanotechnology: from recommendations to
action (Brussels, 24e25 October, 2007). In M. Bonazzi, &
J. Palumbo (Eds.), European Commission, unit “Nano- and con-
verging sciences and technologies”. Brussels, Belgium: Inge De
Prins, COST Ofﬁce.

Cardello, A. V., Schutz, H. G., & Lesher, L. L. (2007). Consumer per-
ceptions of foods processed by innovative and emerging technol-
ogies: a conjoint analytic study. Innovative Food Science and
Emerging Technologies, 8, 73e83.

Chaudhry, Q., Scotter, M., Blackburn, J., Ross, B., Boxall, A., Castle, L.,

et al. (2008). Applications and implications of nanotechnologies
for the food sector. Food Additives and Contaminants, 25(3),
241e258.

CONSUMERCHOICE (2008). European Commission framework 6. Do

European consumers buy GM foods? Final report. Framework 6.
Instrument: 5.4.3 area: impact of food on health, thematic priority:
5 food quality and safety. URL. www.kcl.ac.uk/consumerchoice.
Last Accessed 3.11.09.

Eurobarometer (2008). Europeans’ attitudes towards animal cloning,

analytical report. Survey requested by Directorate General Health
and Consumers and coordinated by Directorate General Commu-
nication (European Commission). In: Flash eurobarometer, Vol.
238. Brussels: The Gallup Organization. October 2008.

European Commission. (2004). EU Policy for nanosciences and

nanotechnologies 2004e2008.

European Commission (2007). Report on food irradiation for the year

2005 (2007/C 122/03). Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union.
C 122/3 of 2.6.2007.

European Opinion Research Group e EORG (2001). Europeans,

science and technology. Survey requested by Directorate-General
for Research and conducted by Directorate-General for Press and
Communication. In: Eurobarometer 55.2. Brussels: Public Opinion
Sector. December 2001.

Fam, K. S., Waller, D. S., & Erdogan, B. Z. (2004). The inﬂuence of

religion on attitudes towards the advertising of controversial
products. European Journal of Marketing, 38(5/6), 537e555.

Fell, D., Wilkins, C., Kivinen, E., Austin, A., & Fernandez, M. (2009).

An evidence review of public attitudes to emerging food
technologies. A Brook Lyndhurst Report for the Food Standards
Agency.

Food Marketing Institute (2005). U.S. grocery shopper trends. Wash-

ington, D.C.: Food Marketing Institute.

Food Standards Agency e FSA. Irradiation. URL. http://www.eatwell.
gov.uk/healthissues/factsbehindissues/irradiation/. Last Accessed 3.
11.09.

Food Standards Agency of Ireland e FSAI (2006). Irradiated food. URL.

http://www.fsai.ie/assets/0/86/204/e3694b0c-be39-43a2-a322-
eb4ad54cb722.pdf. Last Accessed 3.11.09.

Frewer, L. J., Howard, C., & Aaron, I. (1998). Consumers acceptance of

transgenic crops. Pesticide Science, 52, 338e393.

Frewer, L. J., Howard, C., Hedderley, D., & Shepherd, R. (1997).

Consumer attitudes towards different food-processing technologies
used in cheese production e the inﬂuence of consumer beneﬁt.
Food Quality and Preference, 8(4), 271e280.

Costa-Font, M., Gil, J. M., & Traill, B. W. (2008). Consumer acceptance,
valuation of and attitudes towards genetically modiﬁed food: review
and implications for food policy. Food Policy, 33, 99e111.

Frewer, L., Lassen, J., Kettlitz, B., Scholderer, J., Beekman, V., &
Berdal, K. G. (2004). Societal aspects of genetically modiﬁed
foods. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 42, 1181e1193.

Curtis, K. R., McCluskey, J. J., & Wahl, T. I. (2004). Consumer accep-

Frewer, L., & Salter, B. (2002). Public attitudes, scientiﬁc advice and

tance of genetically modiﬁed food products in the developing
world. AgBioForum, 7(1&2), 70e75.

Dekkers, S., de Heer, C., de Jong, W. H., Sips, A. J. A. M., van

Engelen, J. G. M., & Kampers, F. W. H. (2006). Nanomaterials in
consumer products. Availability on the European market and ade-
quacy of the regulatory framework. Requested by the European
Parliament’s Committee on the Environment, Public Health and
Food Safety. Brussels: European Parliament. 2006.

DeRuiter, F. E., & Dwyer, J. (2002). Consumer acceptance of irradiated
foods: dawn of a new era? Food Service Technology, 2(2), 47e58.
van Dijk, H., Houghton, J., van Kleef, E., van der Lans, I., Rowe, G., &

Frewer, L. (2008). Consumer responses to communication about
food risk management. Appetite, 50, 340e352.

Directorate General Health and Consumers (2009). Submissions

scientiﬁc hearing on nanotechnology. URL. http://ec.europa.eu/
health/ph_risk/committees/04_scenihr/docs/nano_submissions.pdf.
Last Accessed 3.11.09.

Eurobarometer (2005). Social values, science and technology. Special

Eurobarometer 225/Wave 63.1. Brussels: TNS Opinion & Social.
June 2005.

Eurobarometer (2006a). Special eurobarometer 244b/Wave 64.3:

Europeans and biotechnology in 2005: Patterns and trends. Survey
requested by Directorate General for Research and coordinated by
Directorate General Press and Communication (European Com-
mission). Brussels: TNS Opinion & Social. July 2006.

the politics of regulatory policy: the case of BSE. Science and
Public Policy, 29(2), 137e145.

Gaskell, G. (2000). Agricultural biotechnology and public attitudes in

the European Union. AgBioForum, 3(2&3), 87e96.

Gaskell, G., Ten Eyck, T., Jackson, J., & Veltri, G. (2005). Imagining
nanotechnology: cultural support for technological innovation in
Europe and the United States. Public Understanding of Science,
14, 81e90.

Grimsrud, R., McCluskey, J., Loureiro, M., & Wahl, T. (2002). Con-
sumer attitudes toward genetically modiﬁed food in Norway. In:
The Joint annual meetings of the WAEA/AAEA, Long Beach, CA,
28e31 July 2002.

Hallman, W. K., & Condry, S. S. (2006). Public opinion and media

coverage of animal cloning and the food supply: Executive sum-
mary. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Food Policy Institute, the State
University of New Jersey.

He, S., Fletcher, S., & Rimal, A. (2005a). Attitudes, acceptance, and
consumption: the case of beef irradiation. Journal of Food Distri-
bution Research, 36(1), 65e70.

He, S., Fletcher, S., & Rimal, A. (2005b). Unwillingness to consume

irradiated beef. Journal of Food Distribution Research, 36(1),
71e78.

Henson, S. (1995). Demand-side constraints on the introduction of

new food technologies: the case of food irradiation. Food Policy,
20(2), 111e127.

Eurobarometer (2006b). Risk issues. Special eurobarometer 238/Wave

Hicks, D. T., Pivarnik, L. F., McDermott, R., Richard, N.,

64.1. Brussels: TNS Opinion & Social. February 2006.

Hoover, D. G., & Kniel, K. E. (2009). Consumer

110

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

awareness and willingness to pay for high-pressure processing
of ready-to-eat food. Journal of Food Science Education, 8(2),
32e38.

Hoban, T. (2004). Public attitudes toward agricultural biotechnology.

ESA Working Paper No. 04e09. Agricultural Economics and
Development Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations. URL: ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/007/ae064e/
ae064e00.pdf. Last Accessed 19th November.

Houghton, J. R., Van Kleef, E., Rowe, G., & Frewer, L. J. (2006).

Consumer perceptions of the effectiveness of food risk manage-
ment practices: a cross-cultural study. Health, Risk & Society, 8(2),
165e183.

House, L., Morrow, B., Lusk, J., & Moore, M. (2001). Modeling Con-
sumer acceptance of and willingness to pay for genetically-modi-
ﬁed foods in the United States and the European Union. In:
International Food and Agribusiness Management Association
Annual Meeting e The World Food and Agribusiness Symposium,
Sydney, Australia, June 27e28, 2001

Huang, J., Qiu, H., Bai, J., & Pray, C. (2006). Awareness, acceptance of
and willingness to buy genetically modiﬁed foods in Urban China.
Appetite, 46, 144e151.

Institute of Food Technologists e IFT (2000). IFT expert report on

biotechnology and foods, beneﬁts and concerns associated with
recombinant DNA biotechnology-derived foods. Food Technol-
ogy, 54(10), 37e56.

van Kleef, E., Frewer, L. J., Chryssochoidis, G. M., Houghton, J. R.,

Korzen-Bohrd, S., Krystallisb, T., et al. (2006). Perceptions of food
risk management among key stakeholders: results from a cross-
European study. Appetite, 47, 46e63.

gene transfer technology. Journal of Agricultural and Resource
Economics, 29(3), 567e583.

O’Fallon, M. J., Gursoy, D., & Swanger, N. (2007). To buy or not to

buy: impact of labeling on purchasing intentions of genetically
modiﬁed foods. Hospitality Management, 26, 117e130.

Rimal, A. P., McWatters, K. H., Hashim, I. B., & Fletcher, S. M. (2004).
Intended vs. Actual purchase behavior for irradiated beef: a simu-
lated supermarket setup (sss) experiment. Journal of Food Products
Marketing, 10(4), 1e15.

Rogers-Hayden, T., Mohr, A., & Pidgeon, N. (2007). Introduction:
engaging with nanotechnologies e engaging differently? Nano-
Ethics, 1, 123e130.

Ronteltap, A., & van Trijp, H. (2007). Consumer acceptance of per-

sonalised nutrition. Genes & Nutrition, 2, 85e87.

Ronteltap, A., van Trijp, J. C. M., Renes, R. J., & Frewer, L. J. (2007).
Consumer acceptance of technology-based food innovations: les-
sons for the future of nutrigenomics. Appetite, 49, 1e17.

Rowe, G., Frewer, L., & Sjo¨berg, L. (2000). Newspaper reporting of

hazards in the UK and Sweden. Public Understanding of Science,
9, 59e78.

Savadori, L., Savio, S., Nocotra, E., Rumiati, R., Finucane, M., &

Slovic, P. (2004). Expert and public perception of risk from bio-
technology. Risk Analysis, 24, 1289e1299.

Scholderer, J., & Frewer, L. J. (2003). The biotechnology communica-

tion paradox: experimental evidence and need for new strategy.
Journal of Consumer Policy, 26, 125e157.

Siegrist, M. (2008). Factors inﬂuencing public acceptance of innova-

tive food technology and products. Trends in Food Science &
Technology, 19, 603e608.

van Kleef, E., Houghton, J. R., Krystallis, A., Pfenning, U., Rowe, G.,

Siegrist, M., Cousin, M., Kastenholz, H., & Wiek (2007). A public

Van Dijk, H., et al. (2007). Consumer evaluations of food risk
management quality in Europe. Risk Analysis, 27(6),
1565e1580.

Landmark Europe (2009). Nanotechnology in consumer products:

challenges and opportunities for Europe. Landmark Public Policy
Advisers Europe 2009.

Lee, C.-J., Scheufele, D. A., & Lewenstein, B. V. (2005). Public attitudes
toward emerging technologies: examining the interactive effects of
cognitions and affect on public attitudes toward nanotechnology.
Science Communication, 27(2), 240e267.

Loureiro, M., & Bugbee, M. (2005). Enhanced GM foods: are con-
sumers ready to pay for the potential beneﬁts of biotechnology?
The Journal of Consumer Affairs, 39, 52e70.

Macoubrie, J. (2005). Informed public perceptions of nanotechnology

and trust in government. Washington D.C.: The Project on
Emerging Nanotechnologies, WoodrowWilson International Cen-
ter for Scholars.

McCluskey, J. J., Grimsrud, K. M., & Wahl, T. I. (2006). Comparison of
consumer responses to genetically modiﬁed foods in Asia, North
America, and Europe. In R. E. Just, J. M. Alston, & D. Zilberman
(Eds.), Natural resource management and policy: Regulating agri-
cultural biotechnology. Economics and policy, Vol. 30
(pp. 227e240). US: Springer.

Mu¨ller, M., & Kersten, S. (2003). Nutrigenomics: goals and strategies.

NaturedReviews, 4, 315e322.

Nayga, R. M., Aiew, W., & Nichols, J. P. (2005). Information effects on

consumers’ willingness to purchase irradiated food products.
Review of Agricultural Economics, 27(1), 37e48.

Nelson, C. H. (2001). Risk perception, behavior, and consumer

response to genetically modiﬁed organisms. American Behavioral
Scientist, 44(8), 1371e1388.

Onyango, B., Ferdaus, H., Hallman, W., Schilling, B., & Adelajan, A.

(2003). Public perceptions of food biotechnology: uncovering
factors driving consumer acceptance of genetically modiﬁed food.
Journal of Food Distribution Research, 34, 37e42.

Onyango, B. M., & Rodolfo, M. N. (2004). Consumer acceptance of

nutritionally enhanced genetically modiﬁed food: relevance of

acceptance of nanotechnology foods and food packaging: the in-
ﬂuence of affect and trust. Appetite, 49(2), 459e466.

Siegrist, M., Stampﬂi, N., & Kastenholz, H. (2009). Acceptance of
nanotechnology foods: a conjoint study examining consumers’
willingness to buy. British Food Journal, 111(7), 660e668.

Siegrist, M., Stampﬂi, N., Kastenholz, H., & Keller, C. (2008). Perceived
risks and perceived beneﬁts of different nanotechnology foods and
nanotechnology food packaging. Appetite, 51, 283e290.

Slovic, P. (1987). Perception of risk. Science, 236(4799), 280e285.
Smallman, M., & Nieman, A. (2006). Small talk: Discussing

nanotechnologies. London: Think-Lab.

Smillie, L., & Blissett, A. (2010). A model for developing risk com-
munication strategy. Journal of Risk Research, 13(1), 115e134.
Spence, A., & Townsend, E. (2006). Examining consumer behaviour
toward genetically modiﬁed (GM) food in Britain. Risk Analysis,
26, 657e670.

Stewart-Knox, B. J., Bunting, B. P., Gilpin, S., Parr, H. J., Pinha˜o, S.,

Strain, J. J., et al. (2009). Attitudes toward genetic testing and per-
sonalised nutrition in a representative sample of European con-
sumers. British Journal of Nutrition, 101, 982e989.

Søndergaard, H. A., Grunert, K. G., & Scholderer, J. (2005). Consumer
attitudes to enzymes in food production. Trends in Food Science &
Technology, 16, 466e474.

Teisl, M. F., Fein, S. B., & Levy, A. S. (2009). Information effects on

consumer attitudes toward three food technologies: organic
production, biotechnology and irradiation. Food Quality and
Preference, 20, 586e596.

Ten Eyck, T., & Gaskell, G. (2003). Comparative research on

biotechnology and the public. Report to the US e EC Task
Force on Biotechnology Research. The National Science
Foundation.

Uzogara, S. G. (2000). The impact of genetic modiﬁcation of human foods
in the 21st century: a review. Biotechnology Advances, 18, 179e206.

Veeman, M., Adamowicz, W., & Hu, W. (2005). Risk perceptions,

social interactions and the inﬂuence of information on social atti-
tudes to agricultural biotechnology. Project Report 05-02; AARI
Project Report 2001J025.

F. Rollin et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

111

Verbeke, W., Viaene, J., & Guiot, O. (1999). Health communication
and consumer behavior on meat in Belgium: from BSE until dioxin.
Journal of Health Communication, 4(4), 345e357.

Wang, S. S., Fridinger, F., Sheedy, K. M., & Khoury, M. J. (2001). Public
attitudes regarding the donation and storage of blood specimens for
genetic research. Community Genetics, 4, 18e26.

World Health Organisation e WHO (2006). Report of a WHO expert
consultation meeting. Venice e Island of San ServoloItaly, 29e30
May 2006.

World Health Organisation e WHO (2009). 20 questions on geneti-
cally modiﬁed (GM) foods. URL. http://www.who.int/foodsafety/
publications/biotech/20questions/en/. Last Accessed 3.11.09.

