A SOCIAL PERSONALIZED ADAPTIVE E-LEARNING 
ENVIRONMENT:
A Case Study in Topolor

Authors

Renato Garita

Lei Shi
Alexandra I. Cristea
Jonathan J. K. Fox
Dana Al Qudah
Alaa Qaffas

Agenda

● Introduction

● Background

● TOPOLOR

● Case Study

● Discussion

● Conclusion and 

Future Work

● What could this 

study be missing?

Introduction
● Social Media (SM)

○ Apply social media features to e-learning systems: 

sharing, tagging, rating, commenting.

○ New opportunities for collaboration, communication 

and active participation.

○ Collaboration and participative learning practice 

provide educational benefits.

Introduction

● Adaptive Educational Hypermedia (AEH)

○ Tailor online courses to the needs of the individual user.
○ Definition and maintenance of an User Model (constantly refined).
○ Take into account background knowledge, learning goals and 

preferences.

○ Personalization techniques:

■ Content adaptation techniques.
■ Adaptive presentation techniques.
■ Adaptive navigation techniques.

Introduction
● None of these techniques take into account 

the information about the user’s social 
connections.

● Integration of SM and AEH only marginally 

explored.

Introduction

● Hypothesis: extensive social features, personalized 

recommendations and Facebook-like appearance of a 
system increase the usefulness and usability of the 
system.

● Focus: study usefulness and ease of use of an adaptive 

personalized social e-Learning environment (Topolor).

Background

● Theoretical

○

Learning is a social endeavour (social constructivism, 

situated cognition, social learning).

○ Unsolved problem: from face-to-face to computerized 

domain keeping effectiveness and efficiency.

● Practical

○ GRAPPLE/GALE
○ MOT2.0

● Problems

○ Gap for extending and evaluating social interaction tools.
○
○

Familiarity of the user with social media is not taken into account.
Features remain missing like sharing status/notes or question-answering exchanges.

TOPOLOR

● Social Personalized Adaptive E-Learning Environment 

(SPAEE).

● Social Interaction Toolset (3 sub-systems)

○ Topolor-Home: chronological list of posts shared by the students.
○ Module Center: warehouse of online modules. Provides recommendations 

for learning content, for learning path, for learning peers and interaction 
tools.

○ Q&A Center: lists of questions/answers related to the contents. Provides 
adaptive recommendations for questions, concepts and expert learners.
■ Quiz service: generates quizzes automatically when the learner is at a 

concept page.

TOPOLOR

Home

Module 
Centre

[2]

Q&A 
Center

TOPOLOR

Quiz 
Service

[2]

Quiz 
Service

TOPOLOR

Learner Recommendations

[2]

Case Study

The Experiment

○
○

21 students and a lecturer from a postgraduate module of the University of Warwick.
Two hour experiment where students learned about “Collaborative Filtering” and 
familiarized with the social interaction toolset.

○ A to-do list with the set of features was handed. The choice of features and which feature 

to use when was up to the students.

Case Study
The Questionnaire

[2]

Case Study
Analysis and Results

● 10 students of 21 responded to 18 questions to test usefulness and 18 

to test ease of use for a total of 36 questions.

Usefulness

Ease of use

[2]

Case Study

Analysis and Results

[2]

Discussion

● Results from the questionnaire

○ 15 out of 18 features rated as useful (mean >= 4)
○ 14 out of 18 features rated as easy to use (mean >= 4)
○ The qualitative analysis by the students regarded it as 

easy to use because of the social media design and 
included some suggestions for improvement.

Discussion

● Analysis of the status feature

○ Students rated high the possibility to comment on 

statuses.

○ For students it also decreased social anxiety by allowing 
them to interact without the need for formal introductions.
○ Students rated low favoriting statuses because they didn’t 

understand their purpose (usefulness) and because of 
design issues (ease of use).

Discussion

● Analysis of the messaging feature

○ Scored low on ease of use due to design issues.

● Analysis of the asking and answering questions features
○ Answering question was the highest rated feature and also the most 

favourable qualitatively.

○ Asking questions was also rated very high.
○ Adding and editing tags of questions was rated low possibly because 

of redundancy.

○ Editing a question was rated the lowest due to design issues. Possibly 

more time is needed to get used to it.

Conclusion and Future Work

● This study was complemented by 3 others

○ Participatory Design for a new SPAEE.
○ Evaluation of usability of various features in Topolor.
○ Learning behaviour pattern analysis in Topolor.

● Features to improve or add (some already implemented):

○ Favoriting
○ Sharing statuses
○ Tagging
○ Messaging and notifying
○ Gamification

What could improve?

● Social learning theories are very complex and 
could provide implementation or evaluation ideas 
(e.g. perspectives, cognitive artifacts, zone of proximal 
development, network analysis for peer recommendations).

[1]

● Very focused on quantitative analysis. Ethnometodological studies can enrich 
the study a lot by analysing the interaction and generation of new knowledge 
within the system.

What could improve?

● A term inherited from Computer-Supported Collaborative 

Learning is Group Cognition. Why not create models of 
groups and not just individuals?

● Some IA could help by abstracting the user model of 

interaction with the system and making analogies with other 
users’ models or generating common models. Also natural 
language analysis can be used to suggest relevancy of 
interventions.

Questions or comments?

Thank you very much!

References

[1] Social Constructivism. http://educ1049blogs43218790.blogspot.de/2013/05/social-constructivism.html
[2] Shi, Lei, Cristea, Alexandra I., Foss, Jonathan G. K., Al Qudah, Dana and Qaffas, Alaa. (2013) A social personalized adaptive 
e-learning environment : a case study in Topolor. IADIS International Journal on WWW/Internet, Volume 11 (Number 3). pp. 1-17. 
ISSN 1645-7641 
[3] Social Constructivism -- Wikipedia. en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_constructivism
[4] Wenger Social Theory Learning. http://pagi.wikidot.com/wenger-social-theory-learning
[5] Stahl, G. (2014). The constitution of group cognition. In L. Shapiro (Ed.), Handbook of embodied cognition. Routledge.
[6] Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge (Acting with Technology). The MIT 
Press.

