Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Translocated effectors of Yersinia
Hiroyuki Matsumoto and Glenn M Young

Currently, all known translocated effectors of Yersinia are
delivered into host cells by type III secretion systems
(T3SSs). Pathogenic Yersinia maintain the plasmid-encoded
Ysc T3SS for the speciﬁc delivery of the well-studied Yop
effectors. New horizons for effector biology have opened with
the discovery of the Ysps of Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B, which
are translocated into host cells by the chromosome-endoded
Ysa T3SS. The reported arsenal of effectors is likely to expand
since genomic analysis has revealed gene-clusters in some
Yersinia that code for other T3SSs. These efforts also revealed
possible type VI secretion (T6S) systems, which may
indicate that translocation of effectors occurs by multiple
mechanisms.

Address
Department of Food Science and Technology, Robert Mondavi South
Laboratory Building, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue,
Davis, CA 95616, USA

Corresponding author: Matsumoto, Hiroyuki (hmatsumoto@ucdavis.edu)
and Young, Glenn M (gmyoung@ucdavis.edu)

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

This review comes from a themed issue on
Host-microbe interactions: bacteria
Edited by Brendan Kenny and Raphael Valdivia

1369-5274/$ – see front matter
# 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI 10.1016/j.mib.2008.12.005

Introduction
The genus Yersinia includes three human pathogens.
The most infamous is the black death agent Y. pestis,
which causes bubonic plague when it is transmitted by
the bite of a ﬂea and pneumonic plague when it is
acquired through aerosol transmission [1]. By contrast,
Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis are enteropatho-
gens transmitted by consumption of contaminated food
or water [2]. These two organisms cause gastrointestinal
syndromes that can develop into fatal septicemia in
patients with compromised or underdeveloped immune
systems. Regardless of the species and type of disease
that ensues, translocation of toxic virulence effectors into
host cells by type III secretion (T3S) systems plays an
essential role in determining the outcome of a Yersinia
infection. There are two recognized groups of effector
proteins delivered by T3SSs among the Yersinia; the Yops
and the Ysps.

Yop effectors and the innate immune
response
Interestingly, despite the various modes of transmission
and diseases caused by the pathogenic Yersinia, they
commonly have the plasmid-encoded Ysc T3SS for the
delivery of six Yop effectors (YopE, YopH, YpkA/YopO,
YopM, YopJ/P, and YopT) (Table 1). Efforts to determine
the biochemical activities of the Yops have revealed that
many targets are cellular components that inﬂuence the
host innate immune response (Figure 1). This arm of the
immune system serves as the front line of defense against
an invasive pathogen [3]. Macrophages and neutrophils
are important elements of the early innate immune
response and serve as sentries that take up and then
inactivate invading bacteria. These cells, which act along
with other facets of the innate immune response, are
induced following the recognition of pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPS) by the family of pattern-
recognition receptors (PRRs) located on a variety of cell
types. In response to PRR agonists or PAMPS, such as
LPS or ﬂagellin, signals are transduced and converged to
activate multiple MAPKs and the NF-kB signaling path-
ways. This inﬂammatory response in turn leads to the
production of numerous proinﬂammatory cytokines, in-
cluding TNF-a, IL-12 and IL-18.

Given the important role that the MAPKs and NF-kB
signaling pathways play in the earliest stages of the
immune response, it is not surprising that one strategy
of pathogenic Yersinia is to interfere with these essential
signaling components [4–6]. It is well established that
YopJ/P is a potent inhibitor of multiple MAPK and NF-
kB pathways [7]. Recent studies have clariﬁed the bio-
chemical nature of YopJ/P activity by revealing that it is
an enzyme that acetylates serine and threonine residues
in the activation loop of MKKs and IKKs [8,9,10].
This modiﬁcation effectively blocks the residues from
being phosphorylated and results in an inhibition of their
activation thereby affecting cytokine production and
inducing apoptosis of macrophages.

Phagocytosis of bacteria requires reorganization of the
actin cytoskeleton through a process that is regulated by
Rho family GTPases [11]. YopE is a Rho GTPase-acti-
vating protein (RhoGAP) that has been shown to stimu-
late GTP hydrolysis,
thereby interfering with actin
depolymerization mediated by the Rho family of proteins
[12,13]. In addition to GTPase activation, it has been
shown that membrane anchoring is also required for the
activation of RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42. Membrane anchor-
ing occurs as the result of a post-translational modiﬁcation
resulting in C-terminal prenylation at a cysteine residue.

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

www.sciencedirect.com

Translocated effectors of Yersinia Matsumoto and Young 95

Table 1

Virulence effector proteins of pathogenic Yersinia.

Effectors

T3SS

Gene locations

Biochemical

Cellular targets

Cellular effects

functions/characteristics

Pathogenic Y. pestis, Y. psuedotuberculosis, and Y. enterocolitica
YopE

Ysc/Ysa Plasmid

Rho GAP mimicry

RhoA, Rac1, Cdc42

YopH

Ysc

Plasmid

Protein tyrosine phosphatase Focal adhesion complexes

(p130Cas, FAK, paxillin,
Fyb, SKAP-HOM, Crk, Pyk2)
Other proteins LAT, SLP-76,
Lck

YpkA/YopO Ysc

Plasmid

Serine/threonine kinase

Gaq, RhoA, Rac1 Actin
(kinase activity activation)

RhoGDI mimicry
Actin binding

YopM

Ysc

Plasmid

Localization to nucleus

Rsk1 and Prk2?

Twelve to twenty tandem
leucine-rich repeats
(20 amino-acid)

YopJ/P

Ysc/Ysa Plasmid

Serine/threonine
Acetyltransferase

MAPKK and IKK family
member proteins

YopT

Ysc

Plasmid

Cysteine protease

RhoA, Rac1, Cdc42

Disruption of actin cytoskeleton
Inhibition of phagocytosis

Disruption of actin cytoskeleton
Disruption of phagocytosis

Inhibition of chemoattractant protein
(MCP1) production (P13K/Akt signaling)
Suppression of adaptive immune
response (cytokine IL-2)

Disruption of actin cytoskeleton

Disruption of phagocytosis
Inhibition of Gaq signaling

Inhibition of cytokine production
(IL-15 and IL-15Ra)
Depletion of NK cells

Inhibition of MAPK and NF-kB signaling
pathways
Suppression of proinﬂammatory cytokine
and chemokine production (TNF-a, IL-8,
IL-12, IL-18, etc.)
Induction of apoptosis

Disruption of actin cytoskeleton
Inhibition of phagocytosis

?
?

?
?
?

Highly pathogenic Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B
YspA
YspL

Chromosome
Chromosome

Ysa
Ysa

Chromosome
Chromosome
Chromosome

Chromosome

YspP
YspF
YspE

YspI

YspK

YspM

Ysa
Ysa
Ysa

Ysa

Ysa

Ysa

?
?

?
Two separate 15 or 17
amino-acid repeats
Protein tyrosine phosphatase ?
?
?
ADP-ribosyltransferase?
?

Ca2+-binding protein
Three tandem 12 amino-acid
repeats

Chromosome

Serine/threonine kinase

Chromosome

GDSL lipase motif

E2 ubiquitin-conjugating
enzymes
?

Inhibition of NF-kB signaling pathway

Growth inhibition of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae

YopT acts as a cysteine protease that removes this lipid
modiﬁcation through cleavage at a site a few residues
upstream of the prenylated cysteine [14,15]. The result-
ing mislocalization inhibits normal signaling function
[13,16].

Rho family members are further controlled by Rho gua-
nine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors
(RhoGDI).
RhoGDI binds and sequesters inactive GDP-bound
Rho family members primarily in the cytoplasm. YpkA/
YopO contains a C-terminal domain that interacts with
RhoA and Rac1 to mimic RhoGDI thereby preventing
nucleotide exchange and activation [17]. Interestingly,

YpkA/YopO also has an N-terminally located serine/
threonine kinase domain that is activated by host cell
derived actin, but its substrate remained a mystery for
many years [18]. Importantly, a group of G proteins that
respond to G protein coupled receptors have emerged as
the YpkA/YopO kinase targets [19]. In a recent elegant
study, it was demonstrated that YpkA/YopO speciﬁcally
phosphorylates Ser47 of Gaq, a key residue located in the
highly conserved diphosphate-binding loop of
the
GTPase fold [19]. This phosphorylation impairs nucleo-
tide binding and prevents Gaq-mediated cellular pro-
cesses, including the subsequent activation of RhoA that
would be expected to limit bacterial phagocytosis by cells.

www.sciencedirect.com

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

96 Host-microbe interactions: bacteria

Figure 1

Cellular targets and signaling pathways targeted by Yersinia effectors translocated by the Ysc and Ysa T3SSs. Left side—Effectors delivered by the
Ysc T3SS found in Y. pestis, Y. pseudotuberculosis, and Y. enterocolitica. Rho family GTPases are targeted by YopE, YpkA/YopO, and YopT. The N-
terminal serine/threonine kinase domain of YpkA/YopO phosphorylates Gaq to prevent activation of trimeric G proteins. YopH tyrosine phosphatase
interacts and dephosphorylates proteins within focal adhesion complexes to inhibit phagocytosis. YopJ/P acetylates serine and threonine residues in
the kinase activation loop of MAPKs and IKKs to prevent them from activation through phosphorylation. Inhibition of MAPKs and IKKs limits expression
of proinflammatory genes. YopM traffics to the nucleus where it may affect gene transcription networks. Right side—Effectors delivered by the Ysa
T3SS of Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B. Presumably, YopE and YopJ/P function as described above. YopN is injected into cells but it does not have a
defined effector function. YspK interacts with E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes and may interfere with proteasome-mediated degradation of IkBa,
negative factor controlling the activation of NF-kB thereby inhibiting the expression of proinflammatory genes.

However, the exact role of YpkA/YopO kinase in affecting
cellular activities remains an avenue open for further
investigation since there are a myriad of signaling path-
ways affected by this Gaq group of G protein signaling
molecules.

Phagocytosis is additionally inhibited by YopH, a protein
tyrosine phosphatase that antagonizes several signaling
pathways [20–22]. YopH speciﬁcally localizes to focal
adhesion complexes where it interacts with and depho-
sphorylates proteins such as FAK, Cas, and paxillin
[21,23]. These proteins are involved in b1 integrin
mediated phagocytic events brought about by the surface
protein invasin of Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis
during epithelial cell invasion. Likewise, in macrophages,
where uptake events can be mediated by complement
receptors or Fc receptors, YopH dephosphorylates focal

adhesin complex-associated proteins,
including Cas,
SKAP-HOM, Fyb, and the FAK-homolog Pyk2 [24,25].

The remaining effector targeted by the Ysc T3SS is
YopM, which has no clearly established function. YopM
is known to trafﬁc to the nucleus when introduced into
HeLa cells. One study of the role that YopM plays during
Y. pestis infection provides intriguing clues for future
efforts. YopM function correlates with the global
depletion of natural killer cells by affecting expression
of IL-15 and IL-15Ra [26].

Ysp effectors of Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B
While the Ysc T3SS is important for Yersinia virulence, it
is now clear that some isolates of Yersinia utilize additional
T3SSs to deliver virulence effectors into targeted host
cells. The highly pathogenic Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

www.sciencedirect.com

Translocated effectors of Yersinia Matsumoto and Young 97

carries the Ysa pathogenicity island (Ysa-PI) encoding a
T3SS that is distinctly different from the Ysc T3SS and is
more related to the Mxi-Spa T3SS of Shigella species [27–
29]. The Ysa-PI is part of a larger region of the chromo-
some, called the plasticity zone, containing numerous
other genes implicated in virulence [30].

Figure 2

Studies using the mouse model of Yersiniosis demon-
strated that the Ysa T3SS plays an important role in Y.
enterocolitica colonization of gastrointestinal tissues during
the earliest stages of an infection [31]. This observation
brings new attention to how enteropathogenic Yersinia
colonizes the intestine and overcomes immune barriers
presented by the host at this location. It may be that the
Ysc T3SS is important for systemic stages of infection,
while the Ysa T3SS is selective for gastrointestinal in-
fection. Evaluating this model is dependent upon deﬁn-
ing and delineating the function of the virulence effectors
delivered by the Ysa T3SS.

The ﬁrst proteins determined to be Ysps effector by
virtue of their being substrates exported by the Ysa
T3SS unexpectedly turned out to be YopE, YopN, and
YopJ/P, three proteins also exported by the Ysc T3SS
[32,27] (Table 1). As described above, YopE and YopJ/P
are known to be effectors, but it is possible that YopN
may also have an unrecognized effector function. It was
further demonstrated that Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B deli-
vers YopJ/P into cultured macrophages and suppresses
production of TNF-a by utilizing either the Ysa or Ysc
pathways [32]. However, gaining a comprehensive un-
derstanding of how the Ysa T3SS mechanistically inﬂu-
ences pathogenesis will depend on efforts to distinguish
the functions of the effectors it delivers.

In this regard, eight additional translocated effectors have
been identiﬁed (YspA, YspE, YspF, YspI, YspK, YspL,
YspM, and YspP) (Table 1). YspA was recognized from
analysis of genes within the Ysa-PI [27]. Recently, a
comprehensive proteomics approach deﬁned the complex-
ity of the Ysa T3SS secretome [33]. This effort conﬁrmed
YspA as an effector and additionally identiﬁed YspE, YspF,
YspI, YspK, YspL, and YspP. Each of these effectors was
shown to be necessary for full virulence of Y. enterocolitica
Biovar 1B in the mouse gastroenteritis competitive index
assay [33]. Finally, YspM was identiﬁed later as an
effector produced by a subset of Biovar 1B strains. When
including YopE, YopN, and YopJ/P, the Ysa T3SS appears
to deliver a collection of ten, and potentially eleven,
effectors depending upon the strain examined.

It is striking that the genes encoding the effectors deliv-
ered by the Ysa T3SS are dispersed throughout the
genome [33] (Figure 2). One ysp is located within the
Ysa-PI, three are located on plasmid pYV, but the seven
remaining map to sites dispersed throughout the chromo-
some. The lack of ysp gene co-localization inspires the

Genes of Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B that encode effectors translocated
into host cells by the Ysa T3SS are dispersed in the genome. The
chromosome with labels indicating the relative locations of effector-
encoding ysp genes and the location of the YSA-PI encoding the Ysa
T3SS is depicted. The Ysa-PI is within a region of the chromosome rich
with other genes implicated in virulence called the plasticity zone (PZ).
Plasmid pYV carries genes encoding the Ysc T3SS (Ysc) and the effector
Yops. A similar plasmid is present in Y. pestis and Y.
pseudotuberculosis.

idea that the evolution of Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B
involved numerous genetic lateral transfer events. The
dispersed gene distribution combined with the complex-
ity of the Ysps suggests that Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B has
experienced strong selective pressure to maintain the Ysa
T3SS. This may reﬂect how this group of Yersina has
adapted to survive differently in the gastrointestinal
environment and may help to explain the severity of
human infections they cause.

With the exception of YopE and YopJ/P, the cellular
targets of the effector proteins delivered by the Ysa

www.sciencedirect.com

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

98 Host-microbe interactions: bacteria

T3SS are largely open for investigation (Table 1, and
Figure 1). Several of the Ysps contain regions or domains
that can be predicted to have particular functions. YspK
serine/threonine kinase activity and YspP tyrosine phos-
phatase activity were demonstrated using in vitro-based
biochemical assays [33]. Furthermore, YspK shares 91%
identity with OspG, an effector produced by Shigella
ﬂexneri [34]. OspG can bind ubiquitinylated E2 con-
jugating enzymes, including UbcH5b that is responsible
for targeting the degradation of many important signaling
factors such as phospho-IkBa by the proteasome [34].
By interfering with phospho-IkBa degradation, its com-
plex with NF-kB is maintained, which suppresses acti-
vation of this proinﬂammatory pathway. Using yeast two-
hybrid analysis, YspK has also been shown to interact with
E2 proteins (Matsumoto and Young, unpublished data).
This result suggests that YspK and OspG have similar
functions in targeting cellular components to limit the
innate immune response (Figure 1). YspM is predicted to
be a GDSL lipase and when expressed in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae it prevents cell growth. It is tantalizing to con-
sider that the predicted lipase activity may be targeting an
essential cellular component but this remains to be
demonstrated [35]. Other Ysps with interesting domains
predicted by computational analysis include YspE with an
ADP-ribosyltransferase motif (Matsumoto and Young,
unpublished results).
In other pathogenic bacteria
ADP-ribosyltransferases are among the most potent viru-
lence factors, marking YspE as a high priority for explora-
tion of its cellular target [36]. Likewise, a calcium-binding
motif predicted for YspI is a unique characteristic of an
effector. This may indicate YspI belongs to a new class of
virulence factors affecting cellular activities through a
novel mechanism triggered by calcium sensing. Clearly
these are speculative predictions, but they are presented
to highlight the potential within the study of the Ysp
effector proteins to reveal new facets of host–pathogen
interactions.

New Yersinia effectors yet to be discovered
Genomic sequencing of numerous strains of Y. pestis and
Y. pseudotuberculosis have revealed a locus with the poten-
tial to encode a T3SS that is different than either the Ysc
or Ysa T3SSs [37,38]. This system resembles the Ssa
T3SS of Salmonella enterica [39]. It has also been reported
that this locus is present in some Y. enterocolitica serotype
O:3 strains [40]. To date, no clear link between this T3SS
and virulence has been established. On another front, one
controversial study has suggested the insecticidal toxin-
like proteins (IT-like proteins) of Y. pestis and Y. pseudo-
tuberculosis may form a new group of effectors [41]. This
assertion was based on the observation that in vitro
ectopic expression of
these IT-like proteins led to
secretion, and in one case even translocation into insect
and mammalian cells, by the Ysc T3SS. The idea that the
Ysc T3S is the native secretion pathway for the insecti-
cidal toxin has recently been challenged, but it remains a

formal possibility that they are exported by the chromo-
somal-encoded Ssa-like T3SS [42].

Do Yersinia translocate effectors by other
mechanisms?
Direct translocation of effectors into host cells by Gram-
negative bacteria can additionally involve T4SSs and
T6SSs. Recent genomic analysis has suggested the pre-
sence of several potential T6SSs encoded by loci dis-
persed among Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis genomes
[43,44]. Some of
these gene-clusters could encode
proteins homologous to the Hcp- and VgrG-families of
secreted proteins and effectors. It has also been reported
that some Y. pseudotuberculosis strains carry a plasmid
potentially encoding a T4SS [45]. there appears to be
abundant opportunity for new effectors to be discovered.

Conclusions
The Yop effectors are nearly identical between Y. pestis,
Y. pseudotuberculosis, and Y. enterocolitica. The study of
pathogenic Yersinia presents an opportunity to examine
how these effectors are utilized by pathogenic species
causing different types of infections. The discovery of the
Ysa T3SS of Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B expands on this
theme of comparative pathology by further revealing that
some effectors, like YopE and YopJ/P, can contribute to
disease when delivered through other pathways, such as
the Ysa T3SS. However, the new twists on effector
biology will come from further pursuing the functions
of newly discovered effectors such as the Ysps. With the
recognition of possible translocated effectors by T6SSs,
there appears to be abundant opportunity for new effec-
tors to be discovered.

Acknowledgements
The authors apologize to colleagues whose work could not be cited owing to
space limitations. We express our appreciation for the editorial advice of
Briana Young. Work in GMY’s laboratory is sponsored by grants from the
National Institutes of Health, R21 AI165042 and R21 AI067676.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:

 of special interest
 of outstanding interest

1.

Stenseth NC, Atshabar BB, Begon M, Belmain SR, Bertherat E,
Carniel E, Gage KL, Leirs H, Rahalison L: Plague: past, present,
and future. PLoS Med 2008, 5:e3.

2. Bottone EJ: Yersinia enterocolitica: overview and

epidemiologic correlates. Microbes Infect 1999, 1:323-333.

3. Medzhitov R: Recognition of microorganisms and activation of

the immune response. Nature 2007, 449:819-826.

4.

5.

6.

Shao F: Biochemical functions of Yersinia type III effectors.
Curr Opin Microbiol 2008, 11:21-29.

Viboud GI, Bliska JB: Yersinia outer proteins: role in modulation
of host cell signaling responses and pathogenesis. Annu Rev
Microbiol 2005, 59:69-89.

Trosky JE, Liverman AD, Orth K: Yersinia outer proteins: Yops.
Cell Microbiol 2008, 10:557-565.

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

www.sciencedirect.com

Translocated effectors of Yersinia Matsumoto and Young 99

7. Orth K: Function of Yersinia effector YopJ. Curr Opin Microbiol

21. Persson C, Nordfelth R, Andersson K, Forsberg A, Wolf-Watz H,

2002, 5:38-43.

Orth K: Yersinia YopJ acetylates and inhibits kinase activation
by blocking phosphorylation. Science 2006, 312:1211-1214.

8. Mukherjee S, Keitany G, Li Y, Wang Y, Ball HL, Goldsmith EJ,
Same as reference [9].
9. Mittal R, Peak-Chew SY, McMahon HT: Acetylation of MEK2 and

I kappa B kinase (IKK) activation loop residues by YopJ
inhibits signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006,
103:18574-18579.

These two studies convincingly demonstrated that acetyltransferase
activity of YopJ/P, which sheds light on a new biochemical modiﬁcation
that affects cellular processes. This biochemical modiﬁcation may have
broader implications on understanding how mammalian signal transduc-
tion pathways are regulated.

10.

Hao YH, Wang Y, Burdette D, Mukherjee S, Keitany G,
Goldsmith E, Orth K: Structural requirements for Yersinia YopJ
inhibition of MAP kinase pathways. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e1375.

A genetic screen to isolate mutants in the yeast MKK, Pbs2, that suppress
YopJ inhibition. Corresponding mutants in human MKKs were similarly
affected suggesting a conserved binding site for YopJ/P found on the
superfamily of MAPK kinases.

11. Barbieri JT, Riese MJ, Aktories K: Bacterial toxins that modify
the actin cytoskeleton. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2002, 18:315-344.

12. Aepfelbacher M: Modulation of Rho GTPases by type III

secretion system translocated effectors of Yersinia. Rev
Physiol Biochem Pharmacol 2004, 152:65-77.

13.

Viboud GI, Mejia E, Bliska JB: Comparison of YopE and YopT
activities in counteracting host signalling responses to
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis infection. Cell Microbiol 2006,
8:1504-1515.

YopE was shown to be a potent inhibitor of infection-induced signalling
cascades, and YopT can only partially compensate for the loss of YopE.
These data helped to demonstrate that there is some but not complete
overlap in the contribution that each of these effectors plays in pathogen-
esis.

14. Sorg I, Hoffmann C, Dumbach J, Aktories K, Schmidt G: The C
terminus of YopT is crucial for activity and the N terminus is
crucial for substrate binding. Infect Immun 2003, 71:4623-4632.

15. Shao F, Merritt PM, Bao Z, Innes RW, Dixon JE: A Yersinia

effector and a Pseudomonas avirulence protein deﬁne a family
of cysteine proteases functioning in bacterial pathogenesis.
Cell 2002, 109:575-588.

16. Aepfelbacher M, Trasak C, Wilharm G, Wiedemann A, Trulzsch K,
Krauss K, Gierschik P, Heesemann J: Characterization of YopT
effects on Rho GTPases in Yersinia enterocolitica-infected
cells. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:33217-33223.

17. Prehna G, Ivanov MI, Bliska JB, Stebbins CE: Yersinia virulence

depends on mimicry of host Rho-family nucleotide
dissociation inhibitors. Cell 2006, 126:869-880.

These authors utilized structural analysis in combination with biochemical
approaches to demonstrate that the C-terminus of YpkA/YopO binds
RhoA and Rac1 in a manner that mimics RhoGDI. This provides a
mechanistic model that supports previous observations of kinase-inde-
pendent functions for YpkA/YopO.

18. Galyov EE, Hakansson S, Forsberg A, Wolf-Watz H: A secreted

protein kinase of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis is an
indispensable virulence determinant. Nature 1993,
361:730-732.

19. Navarro L, Koller A, Nordfelth R, Wolf-Watz H, Taylor S, Dixon JE:

Identiﬁcation of a molecular target for the Yersinia protein
kinase A. Mol Cell 2007, 26:465-477.

This kinase substrate for YpkA/YopO eluded investigators for many
years. This elegant study revealed Gaq to be phosphorylated by YpkA
at a residue in the diphosphate-binding loop that is necessary for
nucleotide exchange. This implicates trimeric G proteins in controlling
key signaling pathways that affect the outcome of an infection.

20. Persson C, Carbelleira N, Wolf-Watz H, Fallman M: The PTPase
YopH inhibits uptake of Yersinia, tyrosine phosphorylation of
p130cas and FAK, and the associated accumulation of the
proteins in peripheral focal adhesion. EMBO J 1997,
16:2307-2318.

Fallman M: Localization of the Yersinia PTPase to focal
complexes is an important virulence mechanism. Mol Microbiol
1999, 33:828-838.

22. Black DS, Bliska JB: Identiﬁcation of p130Cas as a substrate of

Yersinia YopH (Yop51), a bacterial protein tyrosine
phosphatase that translocates into mammalian cells and
targets focal adhesions. EMBO J 1997, 16:2730-2744.

23. Black DS, Montagna LG, Zitsmann S, Bliska JB: Identiﬁcation of
an amino-terminal substrate-binding domain in the Yersinia
tyrosine phosphatase that is required for efﬁcient recognition
of focal adhesion targets. Mol Microbiol 1998, 29:1263-1274.

24. Fallman M, Andersson K, Hakansson S, Magnusson KE,

Stendahl O, Wolf-Watz H: Yersinia pseudotuberculosis inhibits
Fc receptor-mediated phagocytosis in J774 cells. Infect Immun
1995, 63:3117-3124.

25. Ruckdeschel K, Roggenkamp A, Schubert S, Heesemann J:

Differential contribution of Yersinia enterocolitica virulence
factors to evasion of microbicidal action of neutrophils. Infect
Immun 1996, 64:724-733.

26. Kerschen EJ, Cohen DA, Kaplan AM, Straley SC: The plague

virulence protein YopM targets the innate immune response
by causing a global depletion of NK cells. Infect Immun 2004,
72:4589-4602.

27. Foultier B, Troisfontaines P, Vertommen D, Marenne M-N, Rider M,

Persot C, Cornelis GR: Identiﬁcation of substrates and
chaperone from the Yersinia enterocolitica 1B Ysa type III
secretion system. Infect Immun 2003, 71:242-253.

28. Haller JC, Carlson S, Pederson KJ, Pierson DE: A chromosomally
encoded type III secretion pathway in Yersinia enterocolitica is
important in virulence. Mol Microbiol 2000, 36:1436-1446.

29. Young GM: The Ysa type 3 secretion system of Yersinia

enterocolitica biovar 1B. Adv Exp Med Biol 2007, 603:286-297.

30.

Thomson NR, Howard S, Wren BW, Holden MT, Crossman L,
Challis GL, Churcher C, Mungall K, Brooks K, Chillingworth T et al.:
The complete genome sequence and comparative genome
analysis of the high pathogenicity Yersinia enterocolitica
strain 8081. PLoS Genet 2006, 2:e206.

The complete genome analysis of Y. enterocolitica revealed numerous
insights on the evolution of this genus. Among the new insights was the
plasticity zone, a genomic region containing numerous virulence factors
such as the Ysa T3SS, YAPI pilus and Yst-1 T2SS system.

31. Venecia K, Young GM: Environmental regulation and virulence

attributes of the Ysa type III secretion system of Yersinia
enterocolitica biovar 1B. Infect Immun 2005, 73:5961-5977.

32. Young BM, Young GM: Evidence for targeting of Yop effectors
by the chromosomally encoded Ysa type III secretion system
of Yersinia enterocolitica. J Bacteriol 2002, 184:5563-5571.

33. Matsumoto H, Young GM: Proteomic and functional analysis of

the suite of Ysp proteins exported by the Ysa type III secretion
system of Yersinia enterocolitica Biovar 1B. Mol Microbiol
2006, 59:689-706.

The study revealed a completely new set of Yersinia effectors that affect
the outcome of a gastrointestinal infection. This information helped to
clarify that the Ysa T3S system was needed for the infection of a
mammalian host.

34. Kim DW, Lenzen G, Page AL, Legrain P, Sansonetti PJ, Parsot C:

The Shigella ﬂexneri effector OspG interferes with innate
immune responses by targeting ubiquitin-conjugating
enzymes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005, 102:14046-14051.

This study has important implications on understanding the function of
YspK, which is 91% identical to OspG. A series of elegant biochemical
approaches and the use of a mouse model of infection revealed that
OspG interacts with ubiquitin-cojugating enzymes to direct suppression
of the proinﬂammatory pathways and affect disease pathology.

35. Witowski SE, Walker KA, Miller VL: YspM, a newly identiﬁed Ysa

type III secreted protein of Yersinia enterocolitica. J Bacteriol
2008, 190:7315-7325.

This work described the identiﬁcation of Ysa T3SS effector YspM pro-
duced by a subset of Y. enterocolitica strains. YspM is homologous to
proteins classiﬁed as GDSL bacterial
lipases and resulted in growth
inhibition when expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

www.sciencedirect.com

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

100 Host-microbe interactions: bacteria

36. Holbourn KP, Shone CC, Acharya KR: A family of killer toxins.
Exploring the mechanism of ADP-ribosylating toxins. FEBS J
2006, 273:4579-4593.

37. Chain PS, Carniel E, Larimer FW, Lamerdin J, Stoutland PO,

Regala WM, Georgescu AM, Vergez LM, Land ML, Motin VL et al.:
Insights into the evolution of Yersinia pestis through whole-
genome comparison with Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004, 101:13826-13831.

38. Parkhill J, Wren BW, Thomson NR, Titball RW, Holden MT,

Prentice MB, Sebaihia M, James KD, Churcher C, Mungall KL
et al.: Genome sequence of Yersinia pestis, the causative
agent of plague. Nature 2001, 413:523-527.

39. Troisfontaines P, Cornelis GR: Type III secretion: more

systems than you think. Physiology (Bethesda) 2005,
20:326-339.

40. Golubov A, Heesemann J, Rakin A: Uncovering genomic

differences in human pathogenic Yersinia enterocolitica.
FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 2003, 38:107111.

41. Gendlina I, Held KG, Bartra SS, Gallis BM, Doneanu CE,

Goodlett DR, Plano GV, Collins CM: Identiﬁcation and type

III-dependent secretion of the Yersinia pestis insecticidal-like
proteins. Mol Microbiol 2007, 64:1214-1227.

42.

Hares MC, Hinchliffe SJ, Strong PC, Eleftherianos I, Dowling AJ,
Ffrench-Constant RH, Waterﬁeld N: The Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis and Yersinia pestis toxin complex is
active against cultured mammalian cells. Microbiology 2008,
154:3503-3517.

In this study, the authors demonstrated that insecticidal toxins are extra-
cellularly secreted. Thus, it was proposed that these proteins are not likely
to be translocated effectors as originally hypothesized by others.

43. Bingle LE, Bailey CM, Pallen MJ: Type VI secretion: a beginner’s

guide. Curr Opin Microbiol 2008, 11:3-8.

44. Yen YT, Bhattacharya M, Stathopoulos C: Genome-wide in silico
mapping of the secretome in pathogenic Yersinia pestis KIM.
FEMS Microbiol Lett 2008, 279:56-63.

45. Eppinger M, Rosovitz MJ, Fricke WF, Rasko DA, Kokorina G,

Fayolle C, Lindler LE, Carniel E, Ravel J: The complete genome
sequence of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis IP31758, the
causative agent of Far East scarlet-like fever. PLoS Genet
2007, 3:e142.

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

www.sciencedirect.com

