Decision Biases, Cogniti!e Psychology of

Random Utility Models of Choice and Response
Time; Decision Making (Naturalistic), Psychology of;
Decision Making: Nonrational Theories; Decision
Making, Psychology of; Decision Research: Behavi-
oral; Decision Theory: Classical; Group Decision
Making, Cognitive Psychology of; Heuristics for
Decision and Choice; Luce’s Choice Axiom; Risk:
Empirical Studies on Decision and Choice; Utility and
Subjective Probability: Contemporary Theories; Util-
ity and Subjective Probability: Empirical Studies

Bibliography

Arkes H R, Blumer C 1985 The psychology of sunk cost.
Organizational Beha!ior and Human Performance 35: 129–40
Bell D E 1982 Regret in decision making under uncertainty.

Operations Research 30: 961–81

Benartzi S, Thaler R 1995 Myopic loss aversion and the equity
premium puzzle. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(1): 73–92
Camerer C F 1995 Individual decision making. In: Kagel J H,
Roth A E (eds.) Handbook of Experimental Economics.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 587–703

Camerer C, Babcock L, Loewenstein G, Thaler R 1997 Labor
supply of New York City cab drivers. One day at a time.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 407–42

Hsee C K 1996 The evaluability hypothesis: An explanation of
preference reversals between joint and separate evaluations of
alternatives. Organizational Beha!ior and Human Decision
Processes 67: 247–57

Johnson E J, Hershey J, Meszaros J, Kunreuther H 1993
Framing, probability distortions, and insurance decisions.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 7: 35–51

Kachelmeier S J, Shehata M 1992 Examining risk preferences
under high monetary incentives: Experimental evidence from
the People’s Republic of China. American Economic Re!iew
82: 1120–41

Kahneman D 1994 New challenges to the rationality assump-
tion. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 150(1):
18–36

Kahneman D, Knetsch J L, Thaler R 1990 Experimental tests of
the endowment eﬀect and the Coase theorem. Journal of
Political Economy 98(6): 1325–48

Kahneman D, Ritov I 1994 Determinants of stated willingness
to pay for public goods: A study in the headline method.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 9: 5–38

Kahneman D, Tversky A 1979 Prospect theory: An analysis of

decision under risk. Econometrica 47: 263–91

Knetsch J L 1989 The endowment eﬀect and evidence of
nonreversible indiﬀerence curves. American Economic Re!iew
79: 1277–84

Lichtenstein S, Slovic P 1973 Response-induced reversals of
preference in gambling: An extended replication in Las Vegas.
Journal of Experimental Psychology 101: 16–20

Loewenstein G, Elster J (eds.) 1992 Choice O!er Time. Russell

Sage Foundation, New York

McNeil B J, Pauker S G, Sox H C, Tversky A 1982 On the
elicitation of preferences for alternative therapies. New Eng-
land Journal of Medicine 306: 1259–62

Redelmeier D, Shaﬁr E 1995 Medical decision making in
situations that oﬀer multiple alternatives. Journal of the
American Medical Association 273(4): 302–5

3300

Samuelson W, Zeckhauser R 1988 Status quo bias in decision

making. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1: 7–59

Shaﬁr E 1993 Choosing versus rejecting: Why some options are
both better and worse than others. Memory and Cognition
21(4): 546–56

Shaﬁr E, Simonson I, Tversky A 1993 Reason-based choice.

Cognition 49(2): 11–36

Slovic P, Lichtenstein S 1983 Preference reversals: A broader

perspective. American Economic Re!iew 73: 596–605

Tetlock P E 1992 The impact of accountability on judgment and
choice: Toward a social contingency model. Ad!ances in
Experimental Social Psychology 25: 331–76

Tversky A, Kahneman D 1986 Rational choice and the framing

of decisions. Journal of Business 59(4): 251–78

Tversky A, Kahneman D 1991 Loss aversion in riskless choice:
A reference dependent model. Quarterly Journal of Economics
106: 1039–61

Tversky A, Sattath S, Slovic P 1988 Contingent weighting in

judgment and choice. Psychological Re!iew 95(3): 371–84

Tversky A, Shaﬁr E 1992 Choice under conﬂict: The dynamics of

deferred decision. Psychological Science 3(6): 358–61

von Neumann J, Morgenstern O 1947 Theory of Games and
Economic Beha!ior, 2nd edn. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ

E. Shaﬁr

Decision Making (Naturalistic),
Psychology of

Naturalistic decision-making (NDM) is the process by
which people use their experience to make decisions in
complex real-world environments. Many of these
environments involve high levels of risk and time
pressure, are dynamically changing, and have signiﬁ-
cant consequences for both the decision maker and
others. They include domains such as ﬁreﬁghting,
aviation, medicine, and nuclear power operations.
Knowledge gained from experience on the part of the
decision maker plays a key role in the decision process,
because that knowledge is the basis for recognizing
in
situations that require decisions to be made,
determining what
to the
decision, and in deciding what would be an appro-
priate course of action.

information is relevant

Naturalistic decision-making is a new ﬁeld. The ﬁrst
studies were conducted in 1985 by Klein (1998), who
examined decision-making by urban ﬁreﬁghters. This
work was part of a new program initiated by the Army
Research Institute because of the Army’s dissatis-
faction with decision aids that had been developed on
the basis of traditional decision theories. The domi-
nant decision theories at that point grew out of
economic models and emphasized rational choice to
select the optimal decision option. Decision aids based
on these models were laborious, requiring military

commanders to make judgments of probability and
value associated with a set of options. This process was
incompatible with the thought processes typically used
by experienced commanders and so was rejected. The
Army decided that there must be a better way.

The ‘better way’ was to examine what experts do
naturally when they make eﬀective decisions under
challenging conditions and to determine the basis for
the quality of their decisions. Traditional research has
sought to determine why human decision makers
typically fall short of optimality and fail to use fully
rational strategies. In contrast, NDM researchers
recognized that experts in many ﬁelds, such as nurses,
pilots, and military commanders, usually make deci-
sions that achieve their goals, even if they are not
optimal from a traditional perspective. The focus of
NDM research is on understanding how experts make
good decisions under diﬃcult conditions, an under-
standing that can then serve as the basis for training
and aiding novices.

1. How is Naturalistic Decision-making Research
Conducted?

Because of the NDM investigators’ interest in experts’
performance in real settings, the nature of the research
settings and methods typically diﬀer from those used
in traditional decision research.

1.1 Research Settings

Harking back to its origins in military concerns, NDM
research has been conducted in environments that
share some common features that are quite distinct
from the laboratory environment. They include:

1.1.1 Ambiguous cues. The need to make a decision
is prompted by cues that signal that a problem exists,
such as a ﬁre, a malfunction in an aircraft system, or
a deterioration of a patient’s medical condition.
These cues are sometimes ambiguous or subtle, or con-
ﬂict with other cues, suggesting opposing courses of
action. Thus, the nature of the problem may be diﬃ-
cult to determine, and expertise is needed to ‘read’
the cues and ‘size up’ the situation.

1.1.2 Dynamic conditions. Conditions faced by de-
cision makers in natural environments often change
over time, and the human operator must update his
or her understanding of the situation in order to re-
spond appropriately. As conditions shift, goals also
may shift, sometimes from maintaining the status

Decision Making (Naturalistic), Psychology of

quo to coping with an emergency. For example,
when an urban ﬁre commander arrives at a ﬁre, his
initial goal may be to extinguish the ﬁre. However,
when it appears that the roof is about to collapse, his
goal shifts to evacuating all the ﬁreﬁghters.

1.1.3 High risk. In most domains of concern to
NDM researchers, the consequences of making a
poor decision involve high costs, including possible
loss of life or property. If an emergency room doctor
misdiagnoses the presenting symptoms of an uncon-
scious patient, the patient may die. Pilots’ misjudg-
ments about the severity of weather in the vicinity of
their destination airport can result in a crash. Fire-
ﬁghters’ failure to assess correctly the source and na-
ture of a ﬁre can result in application of the wrong
ﬁre suppressor, exacerbating rather than quelling a
ﬁre.

1.1.4 Time pressure. Many decisions in NDM set-
tings must be made quickly before a negative conse-
quence occurs. Fires rage, patient conditions deterio-
rate, enemy aircraft or missiles approach swiftly.
From the initial appearance of cues that signal a prob-
lem to the onset of serious consequences may be a
matter of minutes. Often there is no time to conduct
a full rational analysis of all possible response op-
tions, their probabilities, and their outcomes, which
can take
time and computational
power.

considerable

1.1.5 Team and organizational contexts. Teams,
rather than solo decision makers, are frequently the
rule in NDM settings. While a single individual may
have primary responsibility for the decision, other
players provide critical information, alternative per-
spectives, and critiques of
the decision. Teams
usually function within an organizational context
that establishes goals, norms, and procedures for oper-
ations, sets constraints on what is possible, and deter-
mines what counts as a good decision.

Because NDM researchers are concerned with real-
world settings that embody many of
the above
features, the methods they use also diﬀer considerably
from those employed by traditional decision research-
ers working in the lab.

1.2 Methods

Naturalistic decision-making research tends to be
conducted in the ﬁeld rather than in the laboratory.
Thus, the predominant methods involve observations

3301

Decision Making (Naturalistic), Psychology of

and interviews. Models of decision processes are built
from the ground up, based on rich descriptions derived
from multiple observations in ﬁeld settings. Partici-
pants are interviewed about what they did and why.
Laboratory experiments, on the other hand, typically
involve top-down testing of hypotheses derived from
theories. NDM research is young and has not yet been
formalized to the point at which laboratory studies are
common. However, there have been a number of
studies to test predictions of NDM models.

A technique that has come to be associated with the
NDM approach is called cogniti!e task analysis. This
technique involves interviewing experts about critical
decisions to ﬁnd out what cues signaled the problem,
what information was actually used, why particular
options were considered and perhaps rejected, and
why others were preferred. Highly structured interview
protocols have been developed to assure reliability in
procedures and responses. Several analyses of data
collected using this method have shown it to be sound
and reliable. Other approaches involve process trac-
ing, which seeks to make explicit the knowledge used
as experts work on a task and make decisions. In a
team context, participants’ communication can pro-
vide insight into how they shape the problem, what
they think is important to attend to, their situation
awareness, their plans and strategies, and often their
rationales for choosing a course of action. These
techniques may be applied to videotapes of individuals
performing in real or highly realistic simulated situa-
tions, such as in high-ﬁdelity aircraft simulators.

2. The Recognition-primed Decision Model

Perhaps the most signiﬁcant accomplishment within
the NDM approach has been the development of a
new decision process model. Based on his extensive
investigations of ﬁre ﬁghters in both urban and wildﬁre
situations, of neonatal nurses, and of military per-
sonnel, Klein (1998) proposed a model known as the
Recognition-Primed Decision model
(RPD). This
model emphasizes the importance of recognizing cues
in a situation that signal a particular type of problem.
This recognition triggers retrieval of a response that
has been associated in the past with a similar cue
pattern and has led to a successful resolution.

In contrast, traditional analytic decision theories
would require the decision maker to generate all
possible options in that situation and then to evaluate
each option in a concurrent manner, selecting the best
option among them. In the recognition-primed model,
the decision maker retrieves only one response option
at a time and evaluates how well it satisﬁes the current
goals. If the option is inadequate, then another option
is retrieved and evaluated. Thus, options are con-
sidered in a serial rather than a concurrent manner.
Note that many possible options are ignored in this

3302

strategy. It reﬂects what Herbert Simon called ‘satis-
ﬁcing,’ or choosing the ﬁrst option that satisﬁes one’s
goals and existing constraints, rather than searching
for the best of all possible options.

The RPD model highlights several other ﬁndings

that distinguish the naturalistic approach.

2.1 Importance of Situation Assessment

The initial process involved in the RPD model is cue
recognition and interpretation. A major distinction
between naturalistic and traditional analytic decision
approaches is that the NDM approach includes both a
situation assessment process and choice of a response
option, whereas traditional analytic approaches focus
exclusively on the second component. In real-world
situations, it is critical to recognize and understand the
cues that signal a problem before choosing a response.
If a problem has been assessed incorrectly, it is unlikely
that an appropriate decision will be made. For
example, pilots with an engine malfunction mistakenly
thought the right engine was failing and shut it down.
In fact, it was the left engine that had failed, and the
plane crashed. In traditional laboratory studies, the
situation assessment component of the process typi-
cally is minimal: the participant simply responds to the
problem as designed and presented by the exper-
imenter. A ﬁxed set of options is presented from which
the participant makes a choice.

2.2 Basis for E!aluating Options

Once the situation is understood and a response option
has been retrieved, the option needs to be evaluated. In
traditional analytic models, mathematical computa-
tion is used to combine preferences and probabilities
associated with each option to choose the option that
is mathematically optimal. For example, if you are
buying a car, you may choose from many models. A
variety of factors may inﬂuence your choice, e.g., cost,
size, make, fuel consumption, and convenience fea-
tures such as a sunroof. You need to decide how
important each feature is to you and then evaluate
how each car stacks up on each feature. The car you
select presumably maximizes the combined values
across all of the features. In naturalistic situations,
experts typically use a diﬀerent and less cumbersome
process. The retrieved option is evaluated to determine
if it will satisfy the decision maker’s current goal. If it
does, it is chosen. If it does not, another option is
retrieved and evaluated.

The basis for option evaluation in the NDM
approach is mental simulation–the decision maker
projects forward what is likely to happen if the
candidate option is adopted. This includes identifying
diﬃculties that may be encountered, likely results, and

future decisions that may be required. If no signiﬁcant
impediments are foreseen, then the option is accepted.
If limitations are found, a new option is retrieved or
the original one is modiﬁed to get around the obstacle.

2.3 Role of Knowledge

The ﬁndings just described reﬂect the importance of
the decision maker’s knowledge to the decision-
making process. In traditional laboratory studies of
decision-making and other cognitive processes such as
memory, knowledge has been treated as an unwanted
source of variability. As such, eﬀorts were made to
design pared-down tasks that bypassed whatever
knowledge the participants might have, thus eliminat-
ing the possibility that knowledge could give one
participant an advantage over another. Hence, early
studies of memory involved nonsense syllables or
words such as ang or bwap. In naturalistic decision
studies, knowledge is seen as the basis for making a
decision, so eﬀort is directed toward assessing partici-
pants’ knowledge and how that knowledge is used.

For example, knowledge is critical to situation
assessment. Early studies have shown that perform-
ance diﬀerences between experts and novices can be
traced to diﬀerences in their ability to recognize cue
patterns, but not to diﬀerences in general problem
solving or decision-making skills. For instance, when
chess pieces on a board form a realistic pattern from a
game, chess experts can remember the location of the
pieces much better than novices following only a brief
inspection. However, when the same pieces are rand-
omly placed on the chessboard, the experts perform no
better than novices. This illustrates that pattern
recognition reﬂects experience with the game;
it
provides the expert with a basis for making more
eﬀective decisions about the next moves.

Likewise, knowledge plays a critical role in retrieval
of appropriate options. One might question the serial
option-evaluation strategy described above if the
decision maker were randomly retrieving and evaluat-
ing all possible options. In fact, studies have shown
that experts typically retrieve highly appropriate op-
tions ﬁrst, based on past success in similar situations.
For example, the quality of chess moves selected by
both chess masters and intermediate players during a
game was assessed by grandmasters. The players were
asked to indicate the moves they thought of ﬁrst, as
well as subsequent moves they considered. More
experienced players consistently thought of good
moves as their ﬁrst ones; subsequent moves were
typically worse. This was not the case for novices,
whose order of retrieval was less systematic.

Knowledge also serves as the basis for experts’
evaluation of options. Without knowledge of out-
comes based on prior experience, one cannot know
what outcomes are likely. Studies have documented

Decision Making (Naturalistic), Psychology of

that decision strategies used by experts in a ﬁeld are
quite diﬀerent from those used by novices. Klein
found that relatively inexperienced tank commanders
frequently used analytic concurrent option-evaluation
strategies, whereas more experienced commanders
more often used a recognition-primed sequential
option-analysis strategy. There is one exception to this
ﬁnding, however: experts may revert to more general-
purpose strategies if a situation is unfamiliar and they
lack speciﬁc knowledge relevant to the decision.

3. Value of the Naturalistic Approach

One may ask whether the recognition-primed decision
model is appropriate to all circumstances or is limited
to special cases. Basically, it is appropriate in any
domain in which the decision maker has considerable
experience, when time is limited and conditions are
changing dynamically, and when problems are ill
deﬁned and goals are shifting, conditions that make an
analytic approach diﬃcult or impossible. An RPD
approach represents an eﬃcient use of knowledge and
experience. It is less eﬀortful and time consuming than
most analytic approaches.

Analytic approaches are useful under certain condi-
tions. These include situations in which the decision
maker has little knowledge pertaining to the decision
domain. Adequate time must be available in order to
do a thorough evaluation of many options, when
selecting the optimal solution is important. Analytic
approaches are appropriate when conditions are sta-
ble, the parameters of the problem are clear, and all
options are known. Analytic approaches yield a
reliable, thorough outcome that can be justiﬁed to
participants who may have competing goals and
interests in the problem. For example, analytic ap-
proaches have been used to make decisions about
where to site nuclear power plants. Analytic ap-
proaches are general-purpose tools that anyone can
use when conditions permit.

4. Relations to Other Research Disciplines

Naturalistic decision researchers have borrowed tech-
niques from several other disciplines to conduct their
studies. They are closely aligned with much European
research on work analysis, process tracing, and eco-
logical psychology. Observational techniques have
been drawn from ethnography, along with interview
techniques for understanding the meaning of actions
in context. Eﬀorts to understand the role of expertise
are grounded in cognitive psychology studies of
experts, which involve verbal protocol analysis and
process tracing.

In some cases the goals are similar but the ap-
proaches are diﬀerent across related disciplines. For

3303

Decision Making (Naturalistic), Psychology of

example, researchers from both the NDM and the
judgment and decision-making (JDM) communities
are interested in determining what cues are used to
make decisions and their relative importance. While
JDM researchers seek to determine cue weights, NDM
researchers seek to know how the cues support
situation assessment.

5. Methodological Issues

Because they deviate from traditional
laboratory
methods of science, NDM eﬀorts have been challenged
on several grounds. Most notable has been a challenge
to the scientiﬁc rigor of ﬁeld-based methods, namely,
observations and interviews. NDM researchers main-
tain that a thorough description of the phenomena in
situ is required in order to understand the role of
contextual factors in decision processes and how
knowledge is used. Field studies support the discovery
phase of science in which new phenomena are identi-
ﬁed and documented. Laboratory experiments may be
suitable at a later point when speciﬁc hypotheses or
model tests are desired.

Second, NDM research has not yet yielded formal
models. Investigations are continuing in many do-
mains and local models have been developed, but a
formal general process model has not yet emerged. In
part this reﬂects the newness of the ﬁeld; in part it
reﬂects the goals and interests of the investigators.
Formal models typically are developed so that studies
can be done to disconﬁrm the models and advance the
theory. At the present stage, NDM researchers are still
trying to understand the nature of phenomena of
interest.

Third, one might question the use of expert models
as the basis for prescribing training and decision aids.
Experts do not always agree and experts are fallible, so
how can models based on experts be used as a basis for
training novices? First, the expert models are gen-
eralized, not based on a single expert. Second, NDM
researchers emphasize the importance of building
thorough domain knowledge in order to make better
decisions, rather than training speciﬁc expert strate-
gies. Training of novices is most often done via
context-based scenario training, which emphasizes
that (a) good decisions cannot be made on the basis of
incomplete or incorrect situation assessment, and (b)
option evaluation must take into account future
projections, present constraints, and potential pitfalls,
both of which depend on domain knowledge.

and critical thinking. These include study of problem
identiﬁcation and structuring of decision problems,
especially in dynamic conditions when goals shift and
conﬂict. Ill-structured and unfamiliar problems may
require analogical reasoning or creative problem
solving, processes that go beyond the RPD approach.
Finally, the roles of organizational and other con-
textual features on decision processes need to be better
understood.

7. Rele!ant Readings

To achieve a fuller understanding of the origins and
development of the ﬁeld of naturalistic decision-
making, the reader is directed to the volumes resulting
from a series of workshops that have been held since
NDM research began. The ﬁrst workshop was held in
l989 and yielded the ﬁrst book on naturalistic decision-
making (Klein et al. 1993). Since then, four more
workshops have been held. Each proceedings volume
includes a critique by a researcher representing a
traditional decision-making approach. Klein (1998) is
a popular book that provides a deeper understanding
of NDM and its practical applications, and Flin (1996)
describes decision-making challenges to incident mana-
gers in high-risk industries like oﬀshore oil production.

See also: Decision Biases, Cognitive Psychology of;
Decision Making: Nonrational Theories; Decision
Making, Psychology of; Decision Research: Be-
havioral; Heuristics for Decision and Choice

Bibliography

Flin R 1996 Sitting in the Hot Seat. Wiley, New York
Flin R, Salas E, Strub M, Martin L (eds.) 1997 Decision Making
Under Stress: Emerging Themes and Applications. Ashgate,
Aldershot, UK

Friman H (ed.) 2000 How Professionals Make Decisions. CD-

ROM. National Defense College, Stockholm

Klein G A 1998 Sources of Power. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Klein G E, Orasanu J, Calderwood R, Zsambok C E (eds.) 1993
Decision Making in Action: Models and Methods. Ablex,
Norwood, NJ

Zsambok C, Klein G (eds.) 1997 Naturalistic Decision Making.

Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ

J. M. Orasanu

6. Future Directions in Theory and Research

At the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, eﬀorts in
the NDM community are moving in two directions.
One is to formalize the theory so that predictions may
be made and tested. The other is to expand the scope
to explore issues related to adaptive decision-making

Decision Making: Nonrational Theories

The term ‘nonrational’ denotes a heterogeneous class
of theories of decision making designed to overcome
problems with traditional ‘rational’ theories. Non-
rational theories have been denoted by various terms,

3304

