JCMS 2002 Volume 40. Number 2.  pp. 235–58

Normative Power Europe: A Contradiction in
Terms?*

IAN MANNERS
University of Kent at Canterbury

Abstract

Twenty years ago, in the pages of the Journal of Common Market Studies, Hedley
Bull launched a searing critique of the European Community’s ‘civilian power’ in
international affairs. Since that time the increasing role of the European Union (EU)
in areas of security and defence policy has led to a seductiveness in adopting the
notion of ‘military power Europe’. In contrast, I will attempt to argue that by think-
ing beyond traditional conceptions of the EU’s international role and examining the
case study of its international pursuit of the abolition of the death penalty, we may
best conceive of the EU as a ‘normative power Europe’.

Introduction

‘Europe’ is not an actor in international affairs,
and does not seem likely to become one … (Bull, 1982, p. 151)

With these now renowned words Hedley Bull, the pre-eminent writer of the
‘English School’ of international relations theory, dismissed the suggestion
that the European Community (EC) represented a ‘civilian power’ in interna-
tional relations and endeared himself to a generation of European studies schol-
ars. Bull was responding to the suggestions of writers such as François Duchêne
who claimed that traditional military power had given way to progressive
civilian  power  as  the  means  to  exert  influence  in  international  relations
(Duchêne, 1972, 1973). Bull’s argument forms the starting point for my dis-

* I am very grateful to Ruth Abbey, Mathias Albert, Barry Buzan, Thomas Diez, Mervyn Frost, Stefano
Guzzini, Ulf Hedetoft, Anna Home, Knud Erik Jørgensen, Catarina Kinnvall, Dora Kostakopoulou, Anna
Leander,  Marika  Lerch,  Ben  Rosamond,  Thomas  Saalfeld,  Justus  Schonlau,  Karen  Smith,  Hidemi
Suganami, Richard Whitman, and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA

236

IAN MANNERS

cussion of the international role of the European Union (EU) as a promoter of
norms which displace the state as the centre of concern. It may be the case
that  Bull  was  correct  to  argue  that  ‘from  the  perspective  of  “the  return  to
power politics” of the 1980s’ the civilian power of the EC was conditional
upon the military power of states. However, I will further claim that the de-
velopments of the 1990s in international relations lead us to rethink both no-
tions of military power and civilian power in order to consider the EU’s nor-
mative power in world politics.

My argument begins by briefly surveying the conceptual history of civil-
ian power and military power Europe over the past 20 years in order to locate
these traditional conceptions of the EU’s international role. I will then intro-
duce the idea of normative power Europe, including the EU’s normative dif-
ference, the EU’s normative basis, and an explanation of how EU norms are
diffused. In order to demonstrate the value of considering the normative power
of the EU, I will then look at the case of its international pursuit of the aboli-
tion of the death penalty. Finally, I will conclude by arguing that the concept
of normative power represents a valuable addition to our understanding of the
EU’s civilian and military power in world politics. Thus, the notion of ‘nor-
mative power’ when applied to the EU is not a contradiction in terms, as the
ability to define what passes for ‘normal’ in world politics is extremely rich.

I. Civilian or Military Power Europe
On 9 May 2000, to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Schuman Declara-
tion on ‘Europe Day’, the EU issued publicity material declaring ‘50 Years of
Solidarity, Prosperity and Peace’. Although the claim to being solely respon-
sible for the achievement of peace is questionable, the slogans do reflect the
fact that since the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community, the
EU has increasingly ‘domesticated’ relations between Member States (Man-
ners and Whitman, 2000, p. 257). As Duchêne was to suggest in the early
1970s, Europe at age 20 represented a ‘civilian power’ which was ‘long on
economic power and relatively short on armed force’. As Romano Prodi pro-
nounced at the start of his presidency, the status of the EU as a global civilian
power is one which is still central to a discussion of its role in international
relations: ‘We must aim to become a global civil power at the service of sus-
tainable global development. After all, only by ensuring sustainable global
development can Europe guarantee its own strategic security’ (Prodi, 2000, p.
3).

Twitchett and Maull have both defined civilian power as involving three
key features which I interpret as being the centrality of economic power to
achieve national goals; the primacy of diplomatic co-operation to solve inter-

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

237

national problems; and the willingness to use legally-binding supranational
institutions to achieve international progress (Twitchett, 1976, pp. 1–2; Maull,
1990, pp. 92–3).

It was this notion of civilian power which Bull criticized in 1982 for its
ineffectiveness and lack of self-sufficiency in military power. Bull’s remedy
was to suggest that the EC should become more self-sufficient in defence and
security through seven steps: the provision of nuclear deterrent forces; the
improvement of conventional forces; a greater role played by west Germany;
more involvement on the part of France; a change of policy in Britain; careful
co-existence with the Soviet Union; and careful co-existence with the United
States. Bull’s solution, unimaginable during the 1980s cold war, was to turn
the EC into a military power Europe.

Since the defeat of the European Defence Community by the French na-
tional assembly in 1954, the question of the EC assuming a military dimen-
sion had remained taboo until the agreeing of the Treaty on European Union
(TEU) in 1991. As Whitman has suggested, ‘the TEU had signalled the intent
of the Member States of the Union to move beyond a civilian power Europe
and to develop a defence dimension to the international identity of the Union’
(1998, pp. 135–6), shattering that taboo. The expectation was that the move
from the single structure of the EC to the three-pillar structure of the EU was
part of a fundamental shift from civilian to military power, assuming that the
development of a common foreign and security policy was eventually to in-
clude defence policy. However, for the next seven years the expectations of
foreign policy and military power were not matched by the hoped-for achieve-
ments of the EU, a disappointment which Hill felt was a ‘capabilities–expec-
tation gap’ (Hill, 1993) grounded on unreal expectations which Sjursen termed
an ‘eternal fantasy’ (Sjursen, 1998).

The trend towards military power Europe is now to be found in the com-
mon European security and defence policy (ESDP) agreed at the June 1999
Cologne European Council which committed the EU to having a 60,000-per-
son rapid reaction force (RRF) ready by the end of 2003. While the formal
preparation for the Petersberg tasks of the RRF might be seen by some as
evidence of movement towards a military power Europe, others have argued
that these tasks are still within the remit of a civilian power as the questions of
defence and nuclear capability still remain the concern of Nato (Jørgensen,
1997; Smith, 2000). This militarization of the EU is not without criticism,
with Zielonka arguing that it weakens the EU’s ‘distinct profile’ of having a
civilian international identity (1998, p. 229), while Smith suggests that the
acquisition of military power ‘would represent the culmination of a ‘state-
building’ project. Integration would recreate the state on a grander scale’ (2000,
p. 27).

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

238

IAN MANNERS

Bull’s discussion of the utility of military power, and Duchêne’s notion of
civilian power share more common assumptions than is normally thought.
These shared understandings were part of the frozen nature of international
relations during the cold war period and included assumptions about the fixed
nature of the nation-state, the importance of direct physical power, and the
notion of national interest. Although Duchêne was keen to ‘bring to interna-
tional politics the sense of common responsibility and structures of contrac-
tual politics’ (1973, p. 20) his focus, shared with Bull, was invariably the
strengthening of international society not civil society. Thus both Duchêne
and Bull shared an interest in the maintenance of the status quo in interna-
tional relations which maintained the centrality of the Westphalian nation-
state. Secondly, while Duchêne emphasized ‘civilian forms of influence and
action’ and Bull stressed nuclear deterrence and conventional forces, they
both valued direct physical power in the form of actual empirical capabilities
whether  ‘long  on  economic  power’  (Duchêne,  1973,  p.  19)  or  a  ‘need  for
military power’ (Bull, 1982, p. 151). Thirdly, though Duchêne wanted Eu-
rope to overcome ‘the age-old processes of war and indirect violence’ (1972,
p. 43) and Bull wanted ‘the regeneration of Europe’ (1982, p. 157), they both
saw European interests as paramount – later work on civilian power by Maull
re-emphasizes this focus on the concerns of a limited audience (1990, p. 92).
However, the cold war which structured many of these assumptions ended
with the internal collapse of regimes across eastern Europe whose ideology
was perceived as unsustainable by its leadership and citizens – by the col-
lapse of norms rather than the power of force. Thus a better understanding of
the EU’s role in world politics might be gained by reflecting on what those
revolutions tell us about the power of ideas and norms rather than the power
of empirical force – in other words the role of normative power.

II. Normative Power Europe

Europe’s attainment is normative rather than empirical … . It is perhaps a
paradox to note that the continent which once ruled the world through the
physical impositions of imperialism is now coming to set world standards
in normative terms. (Rosecrance, 1998, p. 22)

As this extract from Rosecrance suggests, Europe’s attainment may be more
normative than empirical – I would agree with this interpretation, but it raises
the question of how we can better understand the international role of the EU.
I argue that by refocusing away from debate over either civilian or military
power, it is possible to think of the ideational impact of the EU’s international
identity/role as representing normative power.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

239

The idea of normative power in the international sphere is not new – Carr
made  the  distinction  between  economic  power,  military  power  and  power
over opinion (Carr, 1962, p. 108). Duchêne was also interested in the norma-
tive power of the EC as an idée force, starting with the beliefs of the ‘found-
ing fathers’ and extending through its appeal to widely differing political tem-
peraments (1973, pp. 2, 7). Elements of this normative power can also be
found in the critical perspective of Galtung when he says that ‘ideological
power is the power of ideas’ (Galtung, 1973, p. 33). Galtung argues that ideo-
logical power is ‘powerful because the power-sender’s ideas penetrate and
shape the will of the power-recipient’ through the media of culture. He differ-
entiated between channels of power (ideological power, remunerative power
and  punitive  power)  and  sources  of  power  (resource  power  and  structural
power), a distinction he argues is ‘fundamental, because it is on the latter that
the European Community is particularly strong, even more so than the United
States’ (Galtung, 1973, p. 36).

One of the problems with the notions of civilian and military power is
their unhealthy concentration on how much like a state the EU looks. The
concept of normative power is an attempt to refocus analysis away from the
empirical emphasis on the EU’s institutions or policies, and towards includ-
ing  cognitive  processes,  with  both  substantive  and  symbolic  components
(Manners, 2000). As Smith has argued, ‘the normative dimension’ is impor-
tant because ‘the debate about civilian power involves fundamental choices
about the EU’s international identity’ (2000, p. 27).

Thus the notion of a normative power Europe is located in a discussion of
the ‘power over opinion’, idée force, or ‘ideological power’, and the desire to
move beyond the debate over state-like features through an understanding of
the  EU’s  international  identity  (Manners  and Whitman,  1998).  In  order  to
clarify these three different representations of the EU’s power in international
relations, it is worth comparing civilian, military and normative power Eu-
rope (see table 1).

What I am suggesting here is that conceptions of the EU as either a civil-
ian power or a military power, both  located in discussions of capabilities,
need to be augmented with a focus on normative power of an ideational na-
ture  characterized  by  common  principles  and  a  willingness  to  disregard
Westphalian conventions. This is not to say that the EU’s civilian power, or
fledgling military power, are unimportant, simply that its ability to shape con-
ceptions of ‘normal’ in international relations needs to be given much greater
attention.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

240

IAN MANNERS

Table 1: Civilian, military and normative powers

                                  Civilian               Military

         Normative

Carr

Galtung

Manners

Economic

Remunerative

Ability to use
civilian
instruments

Military

Punitive

Opinion

Ideological

Ability to use
military
instruments

Ability to shape
conceptions
of ‘normal’

Source: Manners (2002) based on Carr (1962, p. 108), and Galtung (1973, pp. 2, 7).

 III. The EU’s Normative Difference

Is the EU so different in its claim to represent a normative power? From a
relativist viewpoint it might be suggested that the EU is simply promoting its
own norms in a similar manner to historical empires and contemporary global
powers. However, most observers would agree with my observation that the
EU’s normative difference comes from its historical context, hybrid polity
and political-legal constitution. The EU was created in a post-war historical
environment which reviled the nationalisms that had led to barbarous war and
genocide. Because of this the creation of Community institutions and policies
took place in a context where Europeans were committed to ‘pooling their
resources to preserve and strengthen peace and liberty’ (preamble to the Treaty
establishing the European Communities: TEC).

The EU has evolved into a hybrid of supranational and international forms
of  governance  which  transcends  Westphalian  norms  (King,  1999,  p.  313).
Four leading political scientists, when surveying the comparative history of
polities and international systems from Mesopotamia to post-Westphalia, and
from pre-international systems to a post-modern international system, agree
that the EU represents a new and different political form. For Ferguson and
Mansbach the EU is a cross-cutting polity which is part of ‘a strikingly differ-
ent and more complex picture than traditional models of global politics allow,
including less of a distinction between inside and outside the Westphalian
state/polity’ (Ferguson and Mansbach, 1996, p. 401). Similarly, for Buzan
and Little the EU is ‘a new type of entity with actor quality’ which ‘is experi-
menting with a new form of both unit and subsystem structure’ (Buzan and
Little, 2000, p. 359). This particular new and different form of hybridity in-
creasingly emphasizes certain ‘principles which are common to the member
states’ (TEU, art. 6).

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

241

The constitution of the EU as a political entity has largely occurred as an
elite-driven, treaty based, legal order. For this reason its constitutional norms
represent  crucial  constitutive  factors  determining  its  international  identity.
The principles of democracy, rule of law, social justice and respect for human
rights were first made explicit in the 1973 Copenhagen declaration on Euro-
pean  identity,  although  the  centrality  of  many  of  these  norms  was  only
constitutionalized in the TEU. As Alston and Weiler have argued, ‘a strong
commitment  to  human  rights  is  one  of  the  principal  characteristics  of  the
European Union’ (1999, p. 6). Von Bogdandy, Lenaerts and de Smijter sup-
port this argument when they observe that ‘a most prominent piece of evi-
dence is the European Council’s decision at its Cologne summit that a human
rights charter should be drafted for the European Union because ‘protection
of fundamental rights is a founding principle of the Union and an indispensa-
ble  prerequisite  for  her  legitimacy’  (presidency’s  conclusions  cited  in  von
Bogdandy, 2000, p. 1307) and that ‘some thirty years before this decision, the
Court of Justice had already confirmed that “fundamental human rights [are]
enshrined in the general principles of Community law and protected by the
Court”’ (ECJ cited in Lenaerts and de Smijter, 2001, p. 273).

This combination of historical context, hybrid polity and legal constitu-
tion has, in the post-cold war period, accelerated a commitment to placing
universal norms and principles at the centre of its relations with its Member
States (Merlingen et al., 2001) and the world (Clapham, 1999; Smith, 2001).
The EU has gone further towards making its external relations informed by,
and conditional on, a catalogue of norms which come closer to those of the
European convention on human rights and fundamental freedoms (ECHR)
and the universal declaration of human rights (UDHR) than most other actors
in world politics. The EU is founded on and has as its foreign and develop-
ment policy objectives the consolidation of democracy, rule of law, and re-
spect for human rights and fundamental freedoms (TEU, art. 6, art. 11, and
TEC, art. 177). Furthermore it is committed to pursuing these norms in ac-
cordance with the ECHR (TEU, art. 6) and ‘the principles of the United Na-
tions Charter’ (TEU, art. 11, preamble to TEC). Although we may be scepti-
cal about the application and indivisibility of such core norms, as Alston and
Weiler, King, and von Bogdandy are, we cannot overlook the extent to which
the EU is normatively different to other polities with its commitment to indi-
vidual rights and principles in accordance with the ECHR and the UN.

However, there is one more normative difference, as this passage illus-
trates: ‘[W]ithout the backing of force and a willingness to use it, ‘Europe’ is
unlikely to become a normative power, telling other parts of the world what
political, economic and social institutions they should have’ (Therborn, 1997,
p. 380).

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

242

IAN MANNERS

Implicit  in  the  work  of  this  approach  is  the  assumption  that  normative
power requires a willingness to use force in an instrumental way. I reject this
assumption and the instrumentality which accompanies it – in my formula-
tion  the  central  component  of  normative  power  Europe  is  that  it  exists  as
being different to pre-existing political forms, and that this particular differ-
ence pre-disposes it to act in a normative way. In order to examine this claim
of normative difference further, it is necessary to explore the EU’s normative
basis.

IV. The EU’s Normative Basis

The broad normative basis of the European Union has been developed over
the past 50 years through a series of declarations, treaties, policies, criteria
and conditions.1 It is possible to identify five ‘core’ norms within this vast
body of Union laws and policies which comprise the acquis communautaire
and acquis politique. The first of these is the centrality of peace, found in key
symbolic declarations such as that by Robert Schuman in 1950, as well as the
preambles to the European Coal and Steel Treaty in 1951 and the TEC of
1957. The second is the idea of liberty found in the preambles of the TEC and
the TEU of 1991, and in art. 6 of the TEU which sets out four foundational
principles of the Union. The third, fourth and fifth norms are democracy, the
rule of law, and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, all of
which are expressed in the preamble and founding principles of the TEU, the
development co-operation policy of the Community (TEC art. 177), the com-
mon foreign and security provisions of the Union (TEC art. 11), and the mem-
bership criteria adopted at the Copenhagen European Council in 1993.

In addition to these core norms, it is also possible to suggest four ‘minor’
norms within the constitution and practices of the EU, although these are far
more contested. The first minor norm is the notion of social solidarity found
throughout the acquis communautaire et politique of the EU, but in particular
the preambles of the TEC and TEU, the objectives of art. 2 (TEU) and art. 2
(TEC), and the central focus of both the EC’s social policy and the Economic
and Social Committee. The second minor norm is anti-discrimination found
in art. 13 and Title XI of the TEC, as well as the protection of minorities
found in the Copenhagen criteria. The third minor norm is that of sustainable
development enshrined in art. 2 (TEU), art. 2 (TEC) and the all-encompass-
ing art. 6 (TEC). The fourth minor norm is the most recent and has yet to find
any formal expression in treaty form, but is implicit in the Copenhagen crite-

1 See Christiansen’s ‘normative foundations’ (1997); Weiler’s ‘foundational ideals’ (1999); and Laffan’s
‘normative pillar’ (2001).

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

243

ria. This norm is the principle of good governance as found in Romano Prodi’s
inaugural speech to the European Parliament (Prodi, 2000), as well as Com-
mission papers on ‘EU election assistance and observation’ (COM(2000) 191
final) and the ‘White Paper on European governance’ (COM(2001) 428 fi-
nal).

These norms clearly have a historical context to them: peace and liberty
were thus defining features of west European politics in the immediate post-
war period. The norms of democracy, rule of law and human rights grew later
when it was important to distinguish democratic western Europe from com-
munist eastern Europe. These then became defining features of transition from
communist rule in the immediate post-cold war period as the Copenhagen
criteria demonstrate. The norm of the aspiration to social solidarity became
an important counter-measure to the drive for liberalization in the Single Eu-
ropean Act and economic and monetary union. The desire for anti-discrimi-
nation measures also arose from progressive social legislation and the con-
cerns regarding racism and persecution of minorities in the early 1990s. The
norm of sustainable development became important following the Rio Earth
summit when it was included in the Treaty of Amsterdam. Finally the norm of
good governance is becoming vital in the aftermath of the resignation of the
Commission in 1999, the concern for double standards in pursuing the EU’s

Table 2: The EU’s normative basis

Founding
Principles

              Tasks and                     Stable                Fundamental
             Objectives                Institutions                   Rights

Liberty

Social solidarity

Guarantee of
democracy

Democracy

Anti-discrimination

Rule of law

Respect for
human rights
and fundamental
freedoms

Rule of law

Sustainable
development

Human rights

Protection of
minorities

Dignity

Freedoms

Equality

Solidarity

Citizenship

Justice

Treaty base – set Treaty base – set
out in art. 6 of
the TEU

out in arts. 2
of TEC and TEU,
arts. 6 and 13
of TEC

Copenhagen criteria Charter of Fundamental
– set out in the
conclusions of the
June 1993
European Council

Rights of the
European Union

Source: Manners (2002).

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

244

IAN MANNERS

demands for democratic reforms in the central and eastern European coun-
tries,  and  the  recognition  of  the  role  of  governance  in  successful  aid  pro-
grammes.

The reinforcement and expansion of the norms identified here allows the
EU to present and legitimate itself as being more than the sum of its parts. In
the post-cold war era, it is no longer enough for the EU to present itself as
‘merely’ a form of economic government for the management of global eco-
nomics, as the increasing resistance by its citizens to economic liberalization
suggests. This desire for greater legitimacy through the fundamental norms
that the EU represents has most recently found an expression in the charter of
fundamental rights of the European Union adopted at the Nice European Coun-
cil in December 2000. The charter restates and re-emphasizes the core and
minor norms, except good governance, with the aim of ensuring that basic
political and social rights become more widely known to the EU citizenship,
although ‘the charter does not establish any new power or task’ (art. 49) and
will not form part of the EC/EU treaty base in the immediate future.

V. How are EU Norms Diffused?

Accepting the normative basis of the EU does not make it a normative power,
so we need to ask how EU norms are diffused. I suggest that the EU’s norma-
tive power stems from six factors, drawn from Whitehead (1996), Manners
and Whitman (1998), and Kinnvall (1995), shaping norm diffusion in inter-
national relations.

Contagion: diffusion of norms results from the unintentional diffusion of
ideas from the EU to other political actors (Whitehead, 1996, p. 6). Examples
of this are to be found in Coombes’ discussion of how the EU leads by ‘virtu-
ous example’ in exporting its experiment in regional integration (Coombes,
1998,  pp.  237–8).  Such  regional  replication  can  clearly  be  seen  in  the  at-
tempts at integration currently taking place in Mercosur. Informational diffu-
sion is the result of the range of strategic communications, such as new policy
initiatives  by  the  EU,  and  declaratory  communications,  such  as  initiatives
from the presidency of the EU or the president of the Commission. Proce-
dural diffusion involves the institutionalization of a relationship between the
EU and a third party, such as an inter-regional co-operation agreement, mem-
bership of an international organization or enlargement of the EU itself. Ex-
amples of these three procedural factors might be the inter-regional dialogue
with the Southern African Development Community since 1994, the mem-
bership of the EU in the World Trade Organization, or the current enlarge-
ment negotiations taking place with the accession countries of central and
eastern Europe and the Mediterranean.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

245

Transference: diffusion takes place when the EU exchanges goods, trade,
aid or technical assistance with third parties through largely substantive or
financial means. Such transference may be the result of the exportation of
community norms and standards (Cremona, 1998, pp. 86–90) or the ‘carrot
and stickism’ of financial rewards and economic sanctions. Examples of trans-
ference diffusion can be seen in the impact of the Phare and Tacis programmes
to the countries to the east of Europe, as well as the European development
fund to the Cotonou states. Both procedural and transference diffusion are
now facilitated by the conditionality which is required in all EC agreements
with third countries (Smith, 1998; Cremona, 1998, pp. 81–6). Overt diffusion
occurs as a result of the physical presence of the EU in third states and inter-
national organizations. Examples of overt diffusion include the role of Com-
mission delegations and embassies of Member States, or it may involve the
presence of the troika of foreign ministers, the president of the Commission,
or even monitoring missions like that deployed in the former Yugoslavia. The
final factor shaping norm diffusion is the cultural filter which affects the im-
pact of international norms and political learning in third states and organiza-
tions leading to learning, adaptation or rejection of norms (Kinnvall, 1995,
pp. 61–71). The cultural filter is based on the interplay between the construc-
tion of knowledge and the creation of social and political identity by the sub-
jects of norm diffusion. Examples of the cultural filter at work include the
diffusion of democratic norms in China, human rights diffusion in Turkey, or
environmental norms in Britain.

These six factors contribute to the way in which the EU norms are dif-
fused, but in order to get a sense of the extent to which these factors work it is
worth looking at one of the norms the EU seeks to ‘normalize’ in interna-
tional relations – the abolition of the death penalty.

VI. The International Pursuit of the Abolition of the Death Penalty

Although art. 3 of the 1948 universal declaration of human rights, and art. 2
of the 1950 European convention for the protection of human rights and fun-
damental freedoms (ECHR), both affirmed the right of everybody to life, it
was to take over 30 years before European states were to attempt to enshrine
this right in international law through the 1983 protocol no. 6 to the ECHR on
the abolition of the death penalty. Only six years later the UN was attempting
to follow this lead through the 1989 second optional protocol (OPT2) to the
international covenant on civil and political rights (CCPR), aimed at the abo-
lition of the death penalty. By the time protocol no. 6 entered into force in
1985 (with five ratifications), only nine of the current 15 members of the EU

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

246

IAN MANNERS

had abolished the death penalty for all crimes, and 25 of the 43 current mem-
bers of the Council of Europe (CoE) still had the death penalty on their stat-
utes (CoE, 2001; Amnesty International, 2001a). The story of the abolition of
the death penalty is therefore a relatively short and recent one, concerning
itself with how the idea that the death penalty was not a sovereign issue of
criminal justice, but an international issue of human rights, became the norm.
There are three factors which led the EU to work towards the international
abolition of the death penalty, all of which are rooted firmly in the human
rights discourses of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Firstly, the role of the
CoE was vital in ensuring that from the mid-1980s onwards the abolition of
the death penalty had become a significant norm in western Europe. How-
ever, it is important to remember that prior to 1990 only six of the 12 EC
states had abolished the death penalty and only eight had ratified protocol no.
6 of the ECHR. Thus the norm was symbolically important, but had not been
substantiated in law by half of the EC. The second factor was the end of the
cold war which was to provide the impetus for a rethinking of what it meant
to be a democratic, liberal European state. This rethink involved both western
and eastern European states in a reinforcement of the principles of the ECHR
as prerequisite membership conditions for joining the first of western Eu-
rope’s three clubs (the others being Nato and the EU). In June 1996 the CoE
made immediate moratoria and ratification of protocol no. 6 explicit requi-
sites  for  membership,  as  well  as  calling  for  those  Member  States  who  re-
tained the death penalty but did not use it to abolish it in law (CoE, 1996). The
election of the new Labour government in 1997 led to the 1998 abolition of
the death penalty and the 1999 ratification of protocol no. 6 by the final EU
state, the UK. Thus between 1989 and 2000 the six outstanding EU states and
ten of the applicant states abolished the death penalty and ratified protocol
no. 6 (see appendix 1: Death Penalty Record).

The third factor was the crisis of confidence in the EU which character-
ized the period 1992 to 1997 and provided an opportunity for EU institutions
and Member States to reflect on how best to revitalize the Union in order to
recover from the ‘post-Maastricht blues’. One route was to try to strengthen
the EU’s commitment to human rights through the EC acceding to the ECHR,
but  in  March  1996  this  path  was  blocked  by  a  European  Court  of  Justice
ruling that the Community was not competent to ‘adopt rules or conclude
international agreements on human rights’ (Commission, 1996). In June 1997
the insertion of new ‘founding principles’ in art. 6, together with correspond-
ing references to applicant states (art. 49) and sanctions for failing to respect
these principles (art. 7), demonstrate the extent to which the Treaty of Am-
sterdam marked a move towards greater importance for these principles in
the EU. Specifically, the declaration in the final act on the abolition of the

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

247

death penalty spelt out that this was one principle on which all Member States
were in agreement:

The Conference notes that the death penalty, the abolition of which is pro-
vided for in the above mentioned protocol [protocol no. 6] signed in Stras-
bourg on 28 April 1983 and which entered into force on 1 March 1985, is no
longer applied in any of the Member States of the Union, a large majority of
which have signed and ratified the Protocol in question. (Declaration to the
final act, Treaty of Amsterdam)

Thus, following Amsterdam, the EU was in a stronger position to pursue the
abolition of the death penalty as a broader international policy initiative. This
coincided with momentum-building within the European Parliament (EP) for
greater respect for human rights, including a European declaration on funda-
mental rights and the abolition of the death penalty by Member States (Com-
mission, 1997a). In June 1997 the EP adopted a resolution on the abolition of
the death penalty aimed at all European states and called on them to ratify
OPT2. In addition the Parliament suggested the EU should table a resolution
at the UN General Assembly on the universal moratorium on executions (Com-
mission, 1997b). By the end of 1997 it was clear that the EU had changed
direction on the question of human rights, providing a treaty basis for the first
time and taking a route away from the ECHR and towards the independent
pursuit of a universal moratorium. This change was summed up in the decla-
ration annexed to the presidency’s conclusions following the Luxembourg
European Council summit in December 1997 regarding the forthcoming cel-
ebrations to mark the 50th anniversary of the universal declaration of human
rights during 1998 (Commission, 1997c).

For the European Union 1998 was ‘human rights year’, marked by three
important developments on the abolition of the death penalty which were to
place the issue at the forefront of its pursuit of international norms. The first
was the June 1998 guidelines for EU policy towards third countries on the
death penalty issued by the Council of Ministers which set out the objectives
and means of intervention in third countries (Council of EU, 1998b). These
guidelines set the tone for an expansion of tasks including initiatives from the
presidency, involvement in individual cases,2 human rights reporting on the
death penalty, and the general pursuit of an abolitionist international norm.3
The  second  development  grew  out  of  the  operational  guidelines  when  the
presidency began issuing démarches, starting with the Austrian presidency

2 The EU has committed itself to raising individual cases where the death penalty is imposed contrary to
the minimum standards set out in OPT2.
3 EU interventions are to include: encouraging states to ratify and comply with international human rights
instruments;  raising  the  issue  in  multilateral  forums;  encouraging  international  organizations  to  act;
encouraging bilateral and multilateral co-operation and collaboration with civil society.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

248

IAN MANNERS

writing to George W. Bush regarding the case of Stan Faulder v. Texas in
December 1998. This pattern of addressing directly the parties involved fol-
lowed one already established by the Parliament, in particular the EP delega-
tion on relations with the US Congress. The final development was the deci-
sion by the Council to begin presenting an EU annual report on human rights
which would systematically report and assess human rights in the EU and EU
action on human rights in international affairs (Council of EU, 2001a). After
the  ‘human  rights  year’,  the  EU’s  abolitionist  policy  became  more  overt
through the extensive use of declaratory measures and the inclusion of refer-
ences in its human rights communications. Following the Austrian presiden-
cy’s single intervention in 1998, Germany made two declarations, Portugal
seven, France six, Sweden eight, and Belgium six interventions (Commis-
sion, 2001).

Although it is difficult to assess the full impact of the EU’s normative
power on this subject, it is possible to make two broad observations on its
exercise of power. Firstly the EU is clearly trying to reorder the language of
international society through its engagement with the ‘super-executioners’,
China and the USA.4 With both these states the EU is using informational and
overt means to raise the issue of the death penalty through presidential and
parliamentary statements, initiatives and dialogue (Patten, 2000a), as well as
through the use of the delegation offices (e.g. Washington). What is self-evi-
dent about this engagement is the extent to which the EU is clearly not going
to change the minds of the governments concerned, but rather contributes
towards raising the issue to the international level. Secondly, the EU has sought
to raise the issue on a bilateral and multilateral basis as a means of shaping
the  dialogue  between  other  states.  During  the  presidencies  of  Finland  and
Portugal (July 1999–July 2000) the EU raised the issue of the death penalty
on a bilateral basis with over 20 countries (Patten, 2000c). The EU has also
raised the issue multilaterally in the UN through a presidency memorandum
and speech by the Finnish Foreign Minister, Tarja Halonen, to the 54th UN
general assembly in September 1999; and the introduction of a ‘resolution on
the death penalty’ to the 55th, 56th, and 57th sessions of the UN commission
on human rights (CHR) in 1999, 2000 and 2001. Finally, I would suggest that
there have been a number of cases where the EU has played an important, if
not crucial, role in bringing about abolition in four different types of situa-
tion.

4 There are just five ‘super-executioners’. Amnesty International report that 88 per cent of the world’s
1,457 known executions in 2000 were carried out in just four countries – China, Iran, Saudi Arabia and
the USA. The fifth country is Iraq where numbers are reported to be in the ‘hundreds’, but the exact figures
are unknown (Amnesty, 2001b).

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

249

The first situation is the cases of Cyprus and Poland, both members of the
CoE and applicant states to the EU, but both of whom ratified protocol no. 6
of the ECHR only in 2000 (Cyprus in January and Poland in October). In the
case  of  Cyprus  it  is  difficult  to  argue  that  the  abolition  was  a  response  to
joining the CoE in 1961, or a response to signing the CCPR in 1969. In Po-
land the case is less clear cut as it joined the CoE only in November 1991, and
signed the CCPR in March 1977, but this raises the question of why it ratified
protocol no. 6 only in October 2000, eight years after its near neighbours the
Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary. I would argue in both these cases
(and Malta) that abolition of the death penalty was due to procedural diffu-
sion introduced in EU pre-accession negotiations from 1998 onwards, rather
than joining the CoE over ten years earlier (Commission, 2000).

The second situation is the cases of Albania and Ukraine, both members of
the CoE but neither applicant states to the EU. These states have also ceased
using the death penalty for ordinary crimes and ratified protocol no. 6 in 2000
(Ukraine in April and Albania in September). In the case of the Ukraine, the
CoE managed to get President Kuchma to issue a moratorium on executions
when joining in November 1995, but it still conducted 167 executions in 1996,
second only to China (Checkel, 2000). It was only after the EU declaration
and guidelines setting out the importance of abolition in June 1998, and the
EU common strategy on Ukraine adopted in December 1999 restating this
objective, that the Ukraine finally abolished the death penalty legally in De-
cember 1999 (Council of EU, 2000a, d). Similarly, Albania also committed
itself to abolishing the death penalty when joining the CoE in July 1995, but
did not do so despite repeated warnings from the CoE and a visit from the
Human Rights Watch Committee for the Prevention of Torture (HRW, 2000).
Again, it was only after pressure was brought to bear by the EU as part of the
stability pact for south eastern Europe in June 1999, and the threat of remov-
ing support for legal reforms, that the Albanian government finally removed
the death penalty for ordinary crimes from the statutes (although retaining it
for exceptional crimes) in October 2000. In both these cases I would argue
that direct EU pressure led to action on the death penalty in 2000, rather than
joining the CoE five years earlier – ‘the aspiration to be accepted as part of
the European political community has a decisive influence on the decision of
many states … to get rid of the death penalty, including Albania [and] Ukraine’
(Hood, 2001, p. 338).

The third situation is that of the cases of Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan
where the death penalty was abolished in 1998 and 1999 respectively. Nei-
ther of these states was a member of the CoE or the EU at the time of aboli-
tion, although Azerbaijan joined the CoE in January 2001. It is not possible to
argue that EU action led directly to these abolitions, but in both cases the EU

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

250

IAN MANNERS

norm played a role in shaping the activities of the governments. The parlia-
ment of Azerbaijan adopted a law abolishing the death penalty in February
1998, a move that was formally welcomed by the EU. However, on accession
to OPT2 of the CCPR with reservations in January 1999, the governments of
France, Germany, Finland, Sweden and the Netherlands all formally regis-
tered their objections to the reservations (Council of EU, 1998a; UNHCR,
2001). A contrasting recognition of abolition was received by the Turkmenistan
government following its abolition of the death penalty and accession to OPT2
in January 2000 (Council of EU, 2000b). Although neither of these actions
provides  proof  of  direct  EU  involvement,  I  would  suggest  that  EU  norms
passed by contagion, informational and transference means through the tech-
nical assistance for CIS (Tacis) programme contact and participation in the
partnership and co-operation agreements (PCAs). Azerbaijan’s PCA entered
into force in July 1999 and Turkmenistan signed, but did not ratify its PCA in
May 1998.

The fourth situation is that of Turkey and Russia, both of which present
the CoE and the EU with extremely difficult challenges on the question of
human rights and the death penalty. I would argue that although neither has
ratified the protocol no. 2 to the ECHR, or acceded to OPT2 of the CCPR, the
CoE and the EU have played an important external role in bringing pressure
to bear on these two countries. The first process of overt norm diffusion has
been through a joint CoE–EU public awareness campaign established in 1999
at a cost of €670,000 over two years to provide information for the general
public, legal experts and parliamentarians in Albania, Turkey, Russia and the
Ukraine (Patten, 2000c). The second process has been procedural norm diffu-
sion in the accession process for Turkey and the informational norm diffusion
for Russia in the common strategy. Since the 1998 process of accession talks
began  with  the  12  associated  countries,  Turkey  has  been  made  constantly
aware that its human rights standards present the largest barrier to entry, par-
ticularly for the EP. The EU presidency, and also the EP, were exceptionally
active in suggesting that the death sentence on PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan
be suspended and that the PKK give up its armed struggle (Council of EU,
1999, p. 41). The October 2001 constitutional reforms as part of the Turkish
national programme to adopt the Community acquis, including the abolition
of the death penalty for civil offences, clearly demonstrate the normative power
of the EU. In the case of Russia the EU’s common strategy adopted in June
1999 explicitly states that ‘the European Union shall focus on the following
areas of action in implementing this Common Strategy: … by enhancing pro-
grammes to promote the abolition of the death penalty’ (Commission, 1999).
However, although Russia continued to execute until 1999 and then ceased in

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

251

2000, President Putin’s July 2001 statement in favour of abolition of the death
penalty marks an important change in position (Council of EU, 2001b).

These four different situations all lead us to ask, who are the agents of
change in this case study? Contrary to conventional expectations, the main
force for EU policy comes from transnational and supranational organiza-
tions reflecting a combination of norms from civil society and European po-
litical elite. One of the leading experts on capital punishment identifies ‘the
growth of an international human rights movement’ as being the primary force
in the abolitionist movement (Hood, 2001, p. 337). In particular the role of
Amnesty International since 1977, and the Community of Sant’Egidio since
1998, have played a crucial role in encouraging the EP, the Commission and
the Council through Member States, to make abolition an EU policy (Jacot,
1999; Krause, 2000). The EP’s role since its first resolution on the death pen-
alty in 1992 has given a voice to these expressions of transnational civil soci-
ety, in particular through the work of MEPs Hadar Cars, Olivier Dupuis and
Emma Bonino. The Commission, led by External Relations Commissioner
Chris Patten, has also worked to encourage abolition through its political and
economic relations with third countries. Finally, a number of Member States,
in particular France and Italy but since the 1997–98 election of social demo-
crats, also Britain and Germany, have been keen to spread the abolitionist
norm beyond the EU. It is clearly inaccurate to argue that the pursuit of abo-
litionist norms in international relations is for the benefit of a domestic audi-
ence, or to serve national interests, as the Council recognizes that in some
Member States ‘the political decision towards abolition was not taken with
the support of the majority of public opinion’ (Council of EU, 2000c). Indeed
I would argue that the vast majority of EU citizens are completely unaware of
its campaign to abolish the death penalty, which wholly undermines a domes-
tic audience argument. US critics of the EU’s death penalty stance have been
keen to argue that the abolitionist movement is so strong in Europe precisely
because it is ‘less democratic’ (Marshall, 2000). It may be the case that the
EU seeks to be in the ‘abolitionist vanguard’ in order to emphasize its distinc-
tive international identity in contrast to ‘others’ – in particular the US and
China. However, the significance of the EU’s normative, rather than instru-
mental, commitment to the abolition of the death penalty has been underlined
by the problems of extradition to countries with capital punishment, particu-
larly since the events of 11 September 2001 in the US. Despite the obvious
desire of many EU leaders to extradite terrorist suspects for trial in the US,
the EU’s normative difference renders such expediency problematic.5

The 1999 EU Annual Report on Human Rights states that ‘opposition to
the death penalty has become one of the most visible elements in the EU’s

5 ‘Bringing Terrorists to Justice Poses Unprecedented Dilemma’. Financial Times, 22 October 2001.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

252

IAN MANNERS

human rights policy globally’ (Council of EU, 1999, p. 41). This brief study
of the EU’s ‘most visible’ policy helps illustrate the way in which the EU
represents a normative power in world politics. This normative power is not
inconsequential. In the past decade it has helped accelerate an abolitionist
movement which has attracted 37 new converts, swelling the number of abo-
litionist states to 109, and reducing the number of retentionist states to 86
(Amnesty International, 2001a).

Conclusion: A Contradiction in Terms?

In this article I have argued that because of its particular historical evolution,
its hybrid polity, and its constitutional configuration, the EU has a normatively
different basis for its relations with the world. I have then examined what this
normative basis is, and why it is a crucial constitutive feature of the EU as a
hybrid polity having a distinctive international identity. I considered the ques-
tion of how EU norms are diffused in world politics, with a focus on both the
substantive and symbolic transmission of norms. Finally, I examined closely
the case of the EU’s pursuit of the international abolition of the death penalty.
In the case study I drew attention to the role of transnational and suprana-
tional actors in shaping the EU’s policy, a policy which was legalized through
the Amsterdam declaration, the charter on fundamental rights, and the 1998
‘Guidelines for EU policy on the death penalty’. The case study demonstrated
the way in which EU abolitionist policy is diffused through procedural mem-
bership conditions, informational common strategies, and the overt role of
EU delegations.

The concept of normative power is an attempt to suggest that not only is
the EU constructed on a normative basis, but importantly that this predis-
poses it to act in a normative way in world politics. It is built on the crucial,
and usually overlooked observation that the most important factor shaping
the international role of the EU is not what it does or what it says, but what it
is. Thus my presentation of the EU as a normative power has an ontological
quality to it – that the EU can be conceptualized as a changer of norms in the
international system; a positivist quantity to it – that the EU acts to change
norms in the international system; and a normative quality to it – that the EU
should act to extend its norms into the international system.

Although the EU’s international pursuit of the abolition of the death pen-
alty is just one case study, albeit a very interesting one, it does serve to illus-
trate a number of features of the EU increasingly exercising normative power
as it seeks to redefine international norms in its own image. These features
include the willingness to impinge on state sovereignty (such as writing to
prison governors rather than heads of government); interventions in support

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

253

of individuals (such as those under the age of 18 at the time of the crime); the
absence of obvious material gain from its interventions (the extent to which
they  have  costly  consequences  for  important  economic  relations);  and  the
fact that the EU often faces international opposition from the strangest part-
ners – such as the ‘unusual suspects’ of the US, China, Iran, Iraq and Saudi
Arabia in the case of the death penalty. This last observation is an important
one because it allows us to dismiss the accusation that the EU’s ‘norms’ are
really cultural imperialism in disguise – the EU often finds itself at odds with
other developed OECD states, such as the US and Japan, as in the case of the
abolition of the death penalty.

I have attempted to argue that the notion of the EU representing a norma-
tive power in world politics is not a contradiction in terms. In fact I have
suggested quite the opposite – that in addition to civilian or military concep-
tions, the EU should be considered a normative power. The idea of the ‘pool-
ing of sovereignty’, the importance of a transnational European Parliament,
the requirements of democratic conditionality, and the pursuit of human rights
such as the abolition of the death penalty, are not just ‘interesting’ features –
they are constitutive norms of a polity which is different to existing states and
international relations. Thus the different existence, the different norms, and
the different policies which the EU pursues are really part of redefining what
can be ‘normal’ in international relations. Rather than being a contradiction
in terms, the ability to define what passes for ‘normal’ in world politics is,
ultimately, the greatest power of all.

Appendix 1: Death Penalty Record

State

                Abolition

 Protocol No. 6     OPT2 Ratified          Executions in 2000

Germany
Austria
Finland
Sweden
Portugal
Denmark
Luxembourg
France
Netherlands
Cyprus
Romania
Slovenia
Czech Republicb

1949
1968
1972
1972
1976
1978
1979
1981
1982
1983a
1989
1989
1990

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

1989
1985
1990
1985
1986
1985
1985
1986
1986
2000
1994
1994
1993

1992
1993
1991
1990
1990
1994
1992
–
1991
1999
1991
1994
–

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1993
1992
1994
1997
1998
1989
1997
1985
1999
2000

1999
1998
1999
1999
1999
2000
1991
2000
–
1997d

254

Slovak Republicb
Hungary
Ireland
Croatia
Greece
Italy
Moldova
Spain
Belgium
Poland
Bosnia-Herz.
Bulgaria
Estonia
Lithuania
UK
Latvia
Ukraine
Malta
Albania
Turkey
Russia
India
South Korea
Japan
Iran
USA
Saudi Arabia
China

1990
1990
1990
1991
1994
1994
1995
1995
1996
1997
1997a
1998
1998
1998
1998
1999a
1999
2000
2000a
AiPc
retained
retained
retained
retained
retained
retained
retained
retained

1999
1994
1993
1995
1997
1995
–
1991
1998
2000
2001
1999
–
2000
1999
–
–
1994
–-
–
–
–

–
–
–
–
–

IAN MANNERS

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

75 +
85
123 +
1,000 +

Notes:

a Abolished for ordinary crimes only, but retained for exceptional crimes such as crimes

under military law

b Czech and Slovak Republics separated in 1993.
c AiP abolitionist in practice (retained but not used).
d Russia has signed but not ratified protocol no. 6.
✖  = retained but not used.  ✔ = retained and used (numbers unknown).

Correspondence:
Ian Manners
Department of Politics and International Relations, Rutherford College
University of Kent at Canterbury, Canterbury CT2 7NX, England
Tel: 00 44 (0) 12 27 82 72 52  Fax: 00 44 (0) 12 27 82 70 33
email: i.j.manners@ukc.ac.uk
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

✖
✖
✖
✔
NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

255

References

Alston, P. and Weiler, J. (1999) ‘An “Ever Closer Union” in Need of a Human Rights
Policy: The European Union and Human Rights’. In Alston, P. (ed.) The EU and
Human Rights (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 3–66.

Amnesty International (2001a) ‘Abolitionist and Retentionist Countries’.  Website
Against the Death Penalty (Last updated : 1 June 2001), «http://www.web. amnes-
ty.org/rmp/dplibrary.nsf/» accessed 20 March 2002.

Amnesty International (2001b) ‘Facts and Figures on the Death Penalty’. Website
Against the Death Penalty (Last updated : 1 June 2001), «http://www.web. amnes-
ty.org/rmp/dplibrary.nsf/» accessed 20 March 2002.

Bull,  H.  (1982)  ‘Civilian  Power  Europe:  A  Contradiction  in  Terms?’.  Journal  of

Common Market Studies, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 149–64.

Buzan,  B.  and  Little,  R.  (2000)  International  Systems  in  World  History  (Oxford:

Oxford University Press).

Carr, E.H. (1962) The Twenty Years’ Crisis 1919–1939: An Introduction to the Study

of International Relations. 2nd edn (London: Macmillan).

Checkel, J. (2000) ‘Compliance and Conditionality’. ARENA Working Paper WP00/
18,  «http://www.arena.uio.no/publications/wp00_18.htm»  accessed  20  March
2002.

Christiansen, T. (1997) ‘Legitimacy Dilemmas of Supranational Governance: The
European Commission between Accountability and Independence’. In Nentwich,
N.  and  Weale,  A.  (eds)  Political  Theory  and  the  European  Union  (London:
Routledge).

Clapham, A. (1999) ‘Where is the EU’s Human Rights Common Foreign Policy, and
How is it Manifested in Multilateral Fora?’. In Alston, P. (ed.) The EU and Human
Rights (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 627–83.

Commission of the European Communities (1996) Opinion 2/94 of 28 March 1996

(Full Court), Bulletin of the EU, No. 4, 1996, point 1.8.25.

Commission of the European Communities (1997a) ‘Observance of human rights in

the European Union’. Bulletin of the EU, No. 4, 1997, point 1.2.1.

Commission of the European Communities (1997b) ‘Parliament resolution on the

abolition of the death penalty’. Bulletin of the EU, No. 6, 1997, point. 1.2.11.

Commission  of  the  European  Communities  (1997c)  Declaration  by  the  European
Council at the beginning of the year of the 50th anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, Bulletin of the EU, No. 12, 1997, Annex 3.

Commission of the European Communities (1999) ‘Common strategy of the Europe-
an Union on Russia’. (1999/414/CFSP), 4 June 1999, «http://europa.eu.int/comm/
external_relations/russia/common_strategy/index.htm» accessed 20 March 2002.
Commission of the European Communities (2000) ‘Presidency statement on abolition

of death penalty in Cyprus’. Bulletin of EU, 1/2-2000, point 1.6.10.

Commission of the European Communities (2001) ‘EU policy and action on the death
penalty’, Delegation of the European Commission to the United States, «http://
www.eurunion.org/» accessed 20 March 2002.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

256

IAN MANNERS

Coombes, D. (1998) ‘Leading by Virtuous Example: European Policy for Overseas
Development’. In McSweeney, B. (ed.)  Moral Issues in International Affairs:
Problems of European Integration (Basingstoke: Macmillan), pp. 221–45.
Council of Europe (1996) Parliamentary Assembly resolution 1097, 28 June.
Council of Europe (2001) ‘Protocol No. 6 to the Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms Concerning the Abolition of the Death
Penalty’. ETS No. 114, Status as of 29 October 2001,« http://conventions.coe.int»
accessed 20 March 2002.

Council of the European Union (1998a) ‘Presidency statement on abolition of the

death penalty in Azerbaijan’. CFSP 6056/98, Brussels, 19 February.

Council  of  the  European  Union  (1998b)  Guidelines  for  EU  policy  towards  third

countries on the death penalty, 3 June, Brussels.

Council of the European Union (1999) European Union Annual Report on Human

Rights (Brussels: CoE).

Council  of  the  European  Union  (2000a)  ‘Presidency  statement  on  decision  by
Ukraine’s constitutional court on the death penalty’. CFSP 5038/00, Brussels, 11
January.

Council of the European Union (2000b) ‘Presidency statement on abolition of death

penalty in Turkmenistan’. CFSP 5557/00, Brussels, 24 January.

Council of the European Union (2000c) ‘EU memorandum on the death penalty’. 25

February.

Council of the European Union (2000d) ‘Ukraine/Death Penalty – Declaration by the
EU  Presidency’.  Press  Release,  Embassy  of  Portugal,  Washington  D.C.,  29
February.

Council of the European Union (2001a) European Union Annual Report on Human

Rights, Brussels.

Council of the European Union (2001b) ‘Declaration by the Presidency on behalf of
the European Union on President Putin’s statement supporting the abolition of the
death penalty in the Russian Federation’. Presse 283, No. 10610/01, Brussels, 17
July.

Cremona, M. (1998) ‘The European Union as an International Actor: The Issues of
Flexibility and Linkage’. European Foreign Affairs Review, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 67–
94.

Duchêne,  F.  (1972)  ‘Europe’s  Role  in  World  Peace’.  In  Mayne,  R.  (ed.)  Europe

Tomorrow: Sixteen Europeans Look Ahead (London: Fontana), pp. 32–47.

Duchêne, F. (1973) ‘The European Community and the Uncertainties of Interdepend-
ence’. In Kohnstamm, M. and Hager, W. (eds) A Nation Writ Large? Foreign
Policy Problems before the European Community (Basingstoke: Macmillan).

Ferguson, Y. and Mansbach, R. (1996) Polities: Authority, Identities, and Change

(Columbia: University of Southern Carolina Press).

Galtung, J. (1973) The European Community: A Superpower in the Making (London:

Allen & Unwin).

Hill,  C.  (1993)  ‘The  Capability–Expectations  Gap,  or  Conceptualizing  Europe’s
International Role’. Journal of Common Market Studies, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 305–
28.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

NORMATIVE POWER EUROPE: A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS?

257

Hood,  R.  (2001)  ‘Capital  Punishment:  A  Global  Perspective’.  Punishment  and

Society, Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 331–54.

Human Rights Watch (2000) ‘Europe and Central Asia Overview’. In World Report

2000, «http://www.hrw.org/hrw/wr2k/Eca.htm» accessed 20 March 2002.

Jacot, M. (1999) ‘The Death Penalty: Abolition Gains Ground’. UNESCO Courier,

October, pp. 37–8.

Jørgensen, K.E. (1997) ‘Western Europe and the Petersberg Tasks’. In Jørgensen,
K.E. (ed.) European Approaches to Crisis Management (The Hague: Kluwer Law
International), pp. 131–52.

King, T. (1999) ‘Human Rights in European Foreign Policy: Success or Failure for
Post-modern Diplomacy?’. European Journal of International Law, Vol. 19, No.
2, pp. 313–37.

Kinnvall, C. (1995) Cultural Diffusion and Political Learning: The Democratization

of China (Lund: Lund University Press).

Krause,  A.  (2000)  ‘Life  vs.  Death:  The  EU  is  Pressing  the  Case  for  World-wide

Abolition’. Europe, No. 401, pp. 6–9.

Laffan, B. (2001) ‘The European Union Polity: A Union of Regulative, Normative and
Cognitive Pillars’. Journal of European Public Policy, Vol. 8, No. 5, pp. 709–27.
Lenaerts, K. and de Smijter, E. (2001) ‘A “Bill of Rights” for the European Union’.

Common Market Law Review, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 273–300.

Manners, I. (2000) Substance and Symbolism: An Anatomy of Cooperation in the New

Europe (Aldershot: Ashgate).

Manners, I. and Whitman, R. (1998) ‘Towards Identifying the International Identity
of  the  European  Union:  A  Framework  for  Analysis  of  the  EU’s  Network  of
Relations’, Journal of European Integration, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 231–49.

Manners, I. and Whitman, R. (eds) (2000) The Foreign Policies of European Union

Member States (Manchester: Manchester University Press).

Marshall, J. (2000) ‘Death in Venice: Europe’s Death-Penalty Elitism’. The  New

Republic, Vol. 223, No. 5, pp. 12–14.

Maull, H. (1990) ‘Germany and Japan: The New Civilian Powers’. Foreign Affairs,

Vol. 69, No. 5, pp. 91–106.

Merlingen, M., Mudde, C. and Sedelmeier, U. (2001) ‘The Right and the Righteous?
European Norms, Domestic Politics and Sanctions against Austria’. Journal of
Common Market Studies, Vol. 39, No. 1, pp. 59–77.

Patten, C. (2000a) ‘Statement to the European Parliament’. 16 February.
Patten, C. (2000b) ‘Human Rights: Towards Greater Complementarily within and
inbetween  European  Regional  Organisations’.  Speech  to  Council  of  Europe
Conference on ‘The Protection of Human Rights in the 21st Century’, Dublin, 3
March.

Patten, C. (2000c) ‘Contribution to the Debate in the European Parliament on Death
Penalty,  Antipersonnel  Landmines,  Hong  Kong  and  Serbia’.  Speech  to  the
European Parliament’, Speech/00/404, Strasbourg, 25 October.

Prodi, R. (2000) ‘2000–2005: Shaping the New Europe’. Speech to the European

Parliament, Strasbourg, 15 February, Speech/00/41.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

258

IAN MANNERS

Rosecrance, R. (1998) ‘The European Union: A New Type of International Actor. In
Zielonka, J. (ed.) Paradoxes of European Foreign Policy (The Hague: Kluwer
Law International), pp. 15–23.

Sjursen, H. (1998) ‘Missed Opportunity or Eternal Fantasy?: The Idea of a European
Security and Defence Policy’. In Peterson, J. and Sjursen, H. (eds) A Common
Foreign Policy for Europe? Competing Visions of the CFSP (London: Routledge).
Smith, K. (1998) ‘The Use of Political Conditionality in the EU’s Relations with Third
Countries: How Effective?’. European Foreign Affairs Review, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp.
253–74.

Smith, K. (2000) ‘The End of Civilian Power EU: A Welcome Demise or Cause for

Concern?’. International Spectator, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 11–28.

Smith,  K.  (2001)  ‘The  EU,  Human  Rights  and  Relations  with  Third  Countries:
“Foreign Policy” with an Ethical Dimension?’. In Smith, K. and Light, M. (eds)
Ethics and Foreign Policy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 185–
203.

Therborn, G. (1997) ‘Europe in the Twenty-first Century’. In Gowan, P. and Ander-

son, P. (eds) The Question of Europe (London: Verso), pp. 357–84.

Twitchett,  K.  (ed.)  (1976)  Europe  and  the  World:  The  External  Relations  of  the

Common Market (New York: St. Martin’s Press).

United  Nations  High  Commission  for  Human  Rights  (2001)  ‘Declarations  and
Reservations to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil  and  Political  Rights’.  UN  High  Commission  for  Human  Rights.  «http://
www.unhcr.ch/html/menu3/b/treaty19_asp.htm» accessed 20 March 2002.

Von Bogdandy, A. (2000) ‘The European Union as a Human Rights Organization?
Human  Rights  and  the  Core  of  the  European  Union’.  Common  Market  Law
Review, Vol. 37, pp. 1307–38.

Weiler, J. (1999)  The Constitution of Europe (Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press).

Whitehead, L. (1996) The International Dimension of Democratization: Europe and

the Americas (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Whitman, R. (1998) From Civilian Power to Superpower? The International Identity

of the European Union (Basingstoke: Macmillan).

Zielonka,  J.  (1998)  Explaining  Euro-Paralysis:  Why  Europe  is  Unable  to  Act  in

International Politics (Basingstoke: Macmillan).

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002

