Course 1.017 

- 
- 
- 

- 

Good Governance - winter 2014/15 – Semester Schedule 
Introduction - Syllabus - Assignements  
Basic question: What role do institutions play in Human Development?  
The Concept I: Historical background, origins and political applications  

The Concept II: Theoretical backgrounds (theories of democracy and governance)  

-  Measurement and empirical assessment I: Benchmarks and indicators  
- 
Elements I: State capacity, constitutions and administrative structures  
- 
Elements II: Human rights, justice, and the rule of law  
- 
Elements III: The role of transparency and freedom from corruption  
- 
Elements IV: Civil society, social capital, the media and NGOs  
- 
Elements V: The role of culture (inlcuding religion)  

- 

Elements VI: Accountability, crucial element of responsive and responsible governance  

Elements VII: Is Good Governance just another word for Good Capitalism?  

- 
-  Measurement and empirical assessment II: Data analysis  

- 

- 

Impact of democratic governance: a) on economic growth and social welfare; b) on peace 
and conflict resolution 
Conclusion - Final Discussion - Evaluation  

Results of large-N studies 

Basic Books: 

Daron Acemoğlu and James A. Robinson:  
Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty.  
Crown Publishers, 2012 
 
David S. Landes. 
The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and 
Some So Poor.  
New York: W.W. Norton 1998. 
 
Mancur Olson, 1982. The Rise and Decline of Nations: Economic 
Growth, Stagflation, and Social Rigidities,  
Yale University Press, 1982.  

Urbanization/Population Density and Income today 

Reversal due to institutional growth (good governance) 

• Reversal related to changes in institutions/social organizations. 
• Relatively better institutions “emerged” in places that were 

previously poor and sparsely settled. 
– E.g., compare the United States vs. the Caribbean or Peru. 

• Thus an institutional reversal 

– Richer societies ended up with worse institutions. 
– Europeans introduced relatively good institutions in sparsely-settled 

and poor places, and introduced or maintained previously-existing 
bad institutions in densely-settled and rich places. 

• E.g.; slavery in the Caribbean, forced labor in South America, 

tribute systems in Asia, Africa and South America. 

•

Institutions have persisted and affected the evolution of income, 
especially during the era of industrialization. 
 

South Korea and North Korea compared 

World Bank Indictors of Good Governance 

1. Voice and Accountability – measuring political, civil and human rights 
2. Political Instability and Violence – measuring the likelihood of 
violent threats to, or changes in, government, including. terrorism.  

3. Government Effectiveness – measuring the competence of the 

bureaucracy and the quality of public service delivery 

4. Regulatory Burden – measuring the incidence of market-unfriendly 

policies 

5. Rule of Law – measuring the quality of contract enforcement, the 
police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence 

6. Control of Corruption – measuring the exercise of public power for 
private gain, including both petty and grand corruption and state capture 

Source: http://info.worldbank.org/governance/kkz2004/tables.asp  

Source: Grindle, Merilee S. 2007: Good Enough Governance Revisited.  
In. Development Policy Review, 2007, 25 (5): 553-574, p 556. 

Source: Grindle, Merilee S. 2007: Good Enough Governance Revisited.  
In. DevelopmentPolicy Review, 2007, 25 (5): 553-574, p 557. 

Good Governance / Deutschland 
 
 
Die  fünf BMZ-Kriterien „guter Regierungsführung“ sind:  
 

1. Beachtung der Menschenrechte,  

2. Beteiligung der Bevölkerung an politischen Entscheidungen,   

3. Rechtsstaatlichkeit  und  Gewährleistung  von  Rechtssicherheit,   
4. Einführung einer sozialen  Marktwirtschaft  

(seit 2003: „marktorientierte soziale Wirtschaftsordnung“) 

5. Entwicklungsorientierung  staatlichen  Handelns  

 

(BMZ 1996: 8f.).  

Source: Grindle, Merilee S. 2007: Good Enough Governance Revisited.  
In. DevelopmentPolicy Review, 2007, 25 (5): 553-574, p 565. 

Source: Czada 2010 

