Chapter V

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

THAT REASON and passion are antithetical has long been an article of
philosophical faith, less often argued than assumed. Emotive theories of
ethics automatically construe themselves as noncognitive, and aesthetic
theories that assign emotion a role in appreciation typically take them-
selves thereby to exclude art and its objects from the cognitive realm.
Opposing stereotypes may account for complacency about the dichot-
omy. Stereotypical beliefs are cool, calm, settled convictions; stereotypical
emotions are visceral, volatile, violent agitations. We would hardly put
belief in the inverse square law in the same class as Othello’s obsessive
jealousy. Nor would we feel remiss about failing to justify the decision to
assign them to disjoint classes. But actual beliefs and emotions diverge
considerably from such simplistic stereotypes. Unwavering affection for a
lifelong friend may be as stable, justiﬁable, and unperturbing as the belief
that buffaloes once roamed the West; the momentary conviction that
the home team is about to squander its commanding lead, as transient,
unreasonable, and distressing as a stab of envy at a friend’s good fortune.
Emotions and beliefs can be enduring or ephemeral, calm or agitating,
rational or irrational. Neither class of attitudes seems to possess any
qualiﬁcation for epistemic standing that the other lacks. That activation of
passion involves abdication of reason is thus far from obvious. Even if
Lear’s rage is cognitively incapacitating, Huckleberry Finn’s trepidation
over Aunt Sally’s plans to civilize him is not. If a response like Huck’s can
be at once cognitive and affective, epistemology’s alienation of affections
is unjustiﬁed.

Relatively recently, cognitivist theories of emotion have emerged to
counter the traditional view.1 They are ineffective though, because they
construe the realm of the cognitive too narrowly. Typically they take an
emotion to embed a belief, a belief to be an attitude toward a proposition,
and the cognitive status of the emotion to derive from that of the belief it
embeds.2 Thus Fiona’s fear of frogs is cognitive because it embeds her
belief that frogs are dangerous. She would not—indeed could not—fear
frogs, it is said, unless she harbored such a belief. This is just false. The

1 See John Deigh, “Cognitivism in the Theory of Emotions,” Ethics 104 (1994):

824–854.

2 See, for example, Anthony Kenny, Action, Emotion, and Will (London: Routledge and

Kegan Paul, 1963), 187–194.

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

147
shower scene in the movie Psycho regularly terriﬁes audiences who, well
aware that the ﬁlm is a work of ﬁction, do not believe that anyone is actu-
ally in danger. Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony arouses in receptive listeners
an objectless joy. Nor are the arts the sole sources of counterexamples
to this position. Fiona might fear frogs even though careful study has
convinced her that they pose no threat. Even if she cannot rid herself of
the notion that frogs are dangerous, she does not for a moment believe
it. A glorious sunrise, like a great symphony, can occasion objectless joy.
And a baby can revel in his mother’s love long before he develops the
conceptual resources to entertain any attitude toward the proposition that
she loves him.

These objections seem to tell decisively against the thesis that beliefs are
essential to emotions. Still, one might urge that only such emotions as
embed beliefs function cognitively. Thus objectless emotions, irrational
emotions, and the emotions of infants and nonhuman animals are cogni-
tively inert. I suggest, however, that emotions play a variety of cognitive
roles, not all of them derived from or dependent on beliefs or propositions
they embed. This is not to say that all emotions are epistemically estima-
ble. Neither are all beliefs. But if the occurrence of wayward convictions
does not justify banishing all beliefs from the epistemic realm, the occur-
rence of unruly passions ought not constitute grounds for the wholesale
exclusion of emotions. Instead, I suggest, we should investigate the cog-
nitive functions that emotions perform to see how they affect epistemic
tenability. In this chapter, that is what I propose to do. I do not purport
to provide anything remotely like a general theory of emotion, but only to
identify some of the ways emotions advance understanding. My aim is not
to anesthetize emotion but to sensitize cognition—to show that the un-
derstanding we achieve is not indifferent to emotion but that understand-
ing is none the less objective for that.

FEELINGS

Emotions are often called feelings, but feeling alone does not emotion
make. No matter how she feels, a toddler neither suffers from math anxi-
ety nor hopes for eternal salvation, for she lacks the conceptual resources
such emotions require. Queasiness does not qualify as fear unaccompa-
nied by an intimation of danger nor does a twinge amount to remorse
absent a sense of having transgressed. Neither does a feeling’s mere occur-
rence in an appropriate context convert it into an emotion. Despite your
awareness of impending danger, your queasiness could just be something
you ate—particularly if you are inured to the threat or consider yourself
suitably armed against it. But queasiness that registers an intimation of
danger qualiﬁes as a feeling of fear. Whether this is so is not always obvi-

This is not to say that emotions are peculiar to organisms who have
concepts. For the cognitive realm is broader than the conceptual. The
awareness of danger that the sight or sound or smell of a lion sparks in a
springbok is the cognitive component of the springbok’s fear. Granted,
the springbok has no concept of fear. But fear and the concept of fear are
two different things.

We might try to preserve the traditional cognitive/emotive dichotomy
by factoring out cognitive elements and identifying emotions proper with
the affects that remain. Even if it could be implemented, such a strategy
would not be wise. For it would require factoring out features crucial to
the individuation of emotions. Feelings that ﬁgure in distinct emotions
are often phenomenologically of a piece. Pride and admiration, for exam-
ple, can feel the same, their difference residing entirely in the fact that
pride, unlike admiration, registers a sense that the excellence of its object
reﬂects well on oneself. Remorse may differ from regret only by incorpo-
rating a belief that one is responsible for the misfortune it concerns. And
a ﬂutter of anticipation may feel the same whether it ﬁgures in hope or
apprehension. In the one case it registers a favorable opinion of the event
it forebodes; in the other, an unfavorable one. To identify emotions with
feelings then would conﬂate attitudes and erase distinctions worth pre-
serving. For emotions that feel alike do not always function alike. Nor do
they always merit the same assessments. If I hope for a phone call from
Fran, I may hover over the telephone; if I am apprehensive about the
prospect, I may refuse to answer when it rings. If I admire Jane Austen’s
novels, I consider them excellent; if I take pride in them, I claim some
credit for them. The former is reasonable; the latter is not. Unadulterated
feelings then are not sufﬁciently sensitive to demarcate the distinctions we
want to draw. We cannot, without signiﬁcant loss, forego more robust,
cognition-laden characterizations of emotions.

148
ous. We are masters at hiding our emotions from ourselves. Still, the theo-
retical point is clear: absent any intimation of danger, a feeling does not
qualify as fear.

CHAPTER V

Perhaps a rush of anger or a surge of joy has a phenomenologically
uniform feel. Usually emotions are more complex. Parental love, for ex-
ample, is not just—or even mainly—a warm, fuzzy feeling that wells up
whenever one’s child happens to impinge on one’s consciousness. It in-
volves a concern for his well-being, an interest in his interests, happiness
for his successes, sadness over his setbacks, pride in his achievements, hope
for his future. These commingle freely with irritation at his failings, tolera-
tion of his foibles, amusement over his antics, exasperation over his ex-
cesses, and so on. Rather than identify parental love with a particular feel-
ing then, we do better to characterize it as a frame of mind or pattern of
attention that synchronizes feelings, attitudes, actions, and circumstances.

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

149
Nor is it only enduring, relatively stable emotions that constitute pat-
terns of attention.3 A momentary fright rearranges the landscape into a
mosaic of hazards, vulnerabilities, escape routes, and defensive positions.
Opportunities for ﬁght or ﬂight loom large. A cave in the woods ceases to
be just a geological curiosity. Its capacity to serve as a lair for predators or
as a haven from them suddenly stands out.

Feelings, moreover, do not always ﬁgure in emotions. Trust, for exam-
ple, can be fully realized in the reliance I place on someone, in its not
crossing my mind that she might fail me. This seems mainly a matter of
(tacit) belief. No special feeling or complex of feelings need enter in.
Courage can consist in the propensity to perform deeds one recognizes as
dangerous, unimpeded by fear and unmotivated by self-destructiveness,
whatever one’s feelings may be. The ﬁre ﬁghter who rescues a child from
a burning building is not without courage, even if she does not feel brave.
Nor does she lack trust in her colleagues, even if her conﬁdent expectation
of their support involves no particular affect. This is not to deny that feel-
ings of trust and feelings of courage exist. But it is to suggest that the
relation between having an emotion and feeling it is more complicated
and less direct than it ﬁrst appears.

FRAMES OF MIND

An emotion affects both the conﬁguration and the constitution of a sys-
tem of thought. It provides focus, highlighting some aspects of the do-
main, obscuring others, engendering relations of relevance and irrele-
vance. Free-ﬂoating anxiety, for example, brings alarming features to the
fore and overshadows innocuous ones. It might point up the possibility
and downplay the improbability of contracting rabies from a gerbil. On
the other hand, it might latch onto and provide insight into something
well worth worrying about. Should it light on the issue of global warming,
for example, it might effect a realignment of information that constitutes
a genuine contribution to the science of ecology.

What we notice is a function of our interests. Things we overlook in one
frame of mind another renders salient. Emotions are sources of salience.
Envy, for example, highlights available bases for invidious comparisons.
Joan’s envy over Felix’s promotion to the Mugwump Chair of Metaphys-
ics heightens her awareness of disparities in the reception of their respec-
tive views. It brings into focus the widespread practice of casting women’s
professional activities in a less favorable light than men’s. Felix’s manner
is considered self-assured; Joan’s is said to be aggressive. His ﬁrst draft

3 See Ronald de Sousa, “The Rationality of Emotions,” in Explaining Emotions, ed.

A. Rorty (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980), 137.

CHAPTER V

150
shows promise; hers needs work. His criticisms are incisive; hers are carp-
ing. His work extends the insights of his predecessors; hers is derivative.
The list seems endless. Considered separately, none of these descriptions
is precisely inaccurate. But they coalesce into a pattern of usage that sug-
gests that their juxtaposition would not afford a fair basis for comparison.
For the pattern reveals that women tend to be characterized in more de-
rogatory terms than men when both instantiate the same range of predi-
cates. Women and men are not graded on the same scale.

That envy underlies Joan’s insight does not discredit it. For Joan is not
confabulating. The disparities her emotion exposes in fact obtain. Her
reaction to Felix’s promotion crystallizes seemingly diffuse material into
determinate features and patterns whose further instances are easy to rec-
ognize. The raking light her envy casts reveals regularities hitherto cam-
ouﬂaged by the welter of details that surround them. In bringing the situ-
ation to exemplify those regularities, her emotion functions epistemically.
Joan’s envy then effects a shift in focus, drawing attention to aspects of
usage she previously ignored. Her advance in understanding consists not
in discovering new facts but in gaining insight into familiar ones. She was
well aware that Felix’s lectures were called learned. And she was well aware
that hers were called pedantic. But until she saw the pattern connecting
these and kindred characterizations, she did not realize how bias can in-
fect choices about which applicable description to proffer.

That a contention is grounded in emotion then does not automatically
discredit it. For emotion need not distort perception or derail reason.
Emotions often heighten awareness, redirect attention, and sensitize their
subjects to factors that had previously eluded them (and others). Absent
speciﬁc reasons to distrust them, cognitive deliverances of emotion are
initially tenable.

The emotion that occasions it does not, of course, secure the pattern
Joan discerns a position in a tenable system of thought. Only by fostering
reﬂective equilibrium does the insight earn itself a place. Emotion then
confers initial tenability, not full tenability on its cognitive deliverances.
Nor does the incorporation of the pattern into a tenable system show that
her resentment of Felix is justiﬁed. The regularity she discovered provides
reason to doubt that women candidates were given their due. This is not
incompatible with Felix’s meriting the chair. Thus the understanding an
emotion engenders does not automatically justify the emotion that en-
genders it. So there is no circularity. If tenable, an insight like Joan’s pro-
vides additional resources for investigating whether her envy was justiﬁed.
But it does not prejudge the answer.

Emotions can be manipulated. This might lead us to look askance on
the contention that they advance understanding. But I do not contend
that they are wholly reliable sources of justiﬁed true beliefs. I claim only

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

151
that they provide orientations that yield epistemic access to factors we
might otherwise miss. Indeed, manipulation of emotions is a mechanism
by which the arts effect valuable reorientations. By eliciting sympathy for
a child molester, for example, Nabokov’s novel Lolita sensitizes us to the
sometimes tragic complexities of sexual desire. There is more to things
than meets any particular eye. By reorienting ourselves to a domain, we
gain access to unfamiliar facets of it.

Could an unjustiﬁed emotion then engender understanding? It seems
so. Justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed emotions perform many of the same cognitive
functions. Both ﬁx mind sets that structure their domain, highlighting
certain features and connecting them into patterns. Both have the capacity
to draw attention to factors we might otherwise overlook. Moreover,
both selectively heighten awareness, enabling us to detect subtleties, nu-
ances, and intimations that ordinarily elude us. Rational and irrational
optimism cast a rosy glow that focuses on and sensitizes their subjects to
grounds for hope. Reasonable and unreasonable anxiety alike disclose
grounds for concern.

This is not to say that they are equally estimable. Emotions function
cognitively by orienting their subjects to their domains. Unjustiﬁed emo-
tions provide potentially misleading orientations. They might, for exam-
ple, effect inappropriate partitions. Thus excessive timidity could induce
a subject to divide hopscotch players into those who have been injured
in the game and those who have not. Noting the high rate of injury,
she concludes that hopscotch is dangerous. Because her partition is too
coarse to distinguish skinned knees from brain damage, she fails to appre-
ciate how minor most hopscotch injuries are, and thus unreasonably in-
cludes the game along with sky diving in the extension of the predicate
‘dangerous’.

Unjustiﬁed emotions can foster misinterpretation as well. Jealousy, for
example, sensitizes its subjects to signs of inﬁdelity. Irrational jealousy can
oversensitize, prompting its subjects to treat as evidence of betrayal any-
thing that could conceivably be so construed. It thus induces its subjects
to ignore or discount available innocent alternatives. Evidence that admits
of a given construal does not always demand that construal. A word or
gesture or glance that can be taken as a sign of inﬁdelity need not always
be taken as such. The irrationality of Othello’s jealousy lies in its prema-
turely blocking the claims of other construals. Because his orientation
obscures their availability, it leads him to believe that the evidence of
Desdemona’s inﬁdelity is unequivocal.

Justiﬁed emotions and their unjustiﬁed counterparts often differ only in
emphasis. Under the sway of unreasonable emotions, a subject accords
undue prominence to the factors they highlight. The grounds for hope
that the cockeyed optimist identiﬁes may genuinely exist. And conceivably

CHAPTER V

152
the situation is so bleak that a more judicious assessment would occlude
such encouraging signs as there are. An unreasonable emotion then might
afford epistemic access to aspects of the situation that no reasonable
stance would disclose. Still, it would be crazy to take much solace in the
recognition that a dismal prognosis, however highly conﬁrmed, does not
amount to an entailment. This may be some reason for hope, but not
much. What makes the optimism cockeyed is its failure to give the bad
news its due. Highlighting some features and patterns involves overshad-
owing others. If, in accentuating the positive, cockeyed optimism ignores
or underrates the negative, its contribution to understanding is skewed.
For factors that the emotional stance obscures are signiﬁcant.

To be sure, unjustiﬁed emotions need not undermine understanding.
Deliverances of emotion, like other initially tenable commitments, are
subject to compensation, revision, or rejection in the construction of a
tenable system of thought. So a subject given to cockeyed optimism can
use other cognitive devices to moderate its deliverances and control for its
distortion, and thereby contrive a tenable assessment of her situation.
Still, even though unjustiﬁed emotions do not have to mislead, they often
do. Their deliverances, like those of other emotions, are in general psy-
chologically compelling. Paranoids do not just feel persecuted, they typi-
cally think they are persecuted. Unless we have speciﬁc grounds for suspi-
cion, we tend to consider our reactions justiﬁed. When, on the other
hand, we consider an emotion unjustiﬁed, we are apt to discount its deliv-
erances entirely. A self-aware hypochondriac is apt to construe all her
symptoms as psychosomatic. Neither strategy recommends itself. The one
leads us to accept what we should reject; the other, to reject what we
should accept.

To mine unjustiﬁed emotions effectively, one must appreciate when
one’s reactions are inappropriate and then compensate for their skew.
Even paranoids have enemies, so a paranoid’s feelings of persecution
ought not automatically be discounted. To give his reactions their epi-
stemic due, a paranoid would need to develop a cognitive ﬁlter that sifts
his irrational feelings of persecution from feelings that constitute evidence
that he is actually being persecuted. Even hypochondriacs get sick. So
to give her reactions their due, a hypochondriac requires a method for
identifying the symptoms she ought to consider indications of illness.
Developing and deploying the requisite compensation strategies is a
labor-intensive process fraught with opportunities to go awry. Far better
to obviate the need for them. Although the tenability of deliverances of
justiﬁed emotions is not assured, their prospects are better. General and
risky compensation strategies are not necessary to convert them into plau-
sible candidates for incorporation into tenable systems. The reason is
plain. Justiﬁed emotions are initially tenable sources of commitments.

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

153
Unjustiﬁed emotions are not. There is then a general presumption in favor
of deliverances of justiﬁed emotions that deliverances of unjustiﬁed emo-
tions do not share. Commitments engendered by either are themselves
initially tenable. But the initial tenability of their source strengthens the
epistemic of deliverances of justiﬁed emotions. Deliverances of unjustiﬁed
emotions receive no such support. Each stands or falls on its own.

Emotions function cognitively, I have urged, by engendering patterns
of attention or frames of mind. If, as I have intimated, beliefs are episte-
mically analogous, they do the same. Typically, in explicating belief and
the other propositional attitudes, philosophers concentrate on the pro-
positional aspect, construing each such attitude as a relation between a
subject and a proposition. The cognitive function they focus on then is
that of accepting a proposition. The analogy that interests me, however,
derives from the attitudinal element. For an attitude is a complex, con-
text-sensitive stance. Whether or not belief involves a relation to a propos-
itional object, it supplies an orientation—a perspective that highlights
some objects and aspects, some dimensions and characterizations, while
obscuring or overshadowing or discrediting others. Expectations, states
of perceptual readiness, patterns of salience, and dispositions to utter, ac-
cept, reject, and deliberate all ﬁgure in the attitude—each informed by the
matrix of commitments it belongs to.

The belief that the dean acts dictatorially, for example, heightens the
salience of certain aspects of her managerial style—her propensity to call
meetings on short notice and schedule them at inconvenient times, her
practice of setting agendas so that trivial issues receive undue attention,
leaving little time for important matters, her willingness to act unilaterally
and to appoint her cronies to committees, and so on. The belief also man-
ifests itself in a propensity to look for, and an ability to discern, Machiavel-
lian motives behind the dean’s seemingly innocuous actions. The activa-
tion of this mind set does not require that the proposition ‘The dean acts
dictatorially’ ever be expressly entertained. It is enough that the subject
focuses on these particular aspects of her managerial style. Nor need the
proposition be true. Conceivably, the features the pattern discloses stem
from a combination of enthusiasm and administrative incompetence.
Nevertheless, it is the belief that she acts dictatorially that brings them to
the fore, enabling the subject to recognize them. I do not, of course,
contend that delimiting a frame of mind is the sole cognitive function of
belief. Nor is it the sole cognitive function of emotion. I mention it here
because it is a function that is often overlooked and one that belief and
emotion share.

By focusing attention, emotions even effect reﬁnements in sensory dis-
crimination. To the uninitiated, babies’ cries sound pretty much alike. But
parents who are dismayed over their infants’ distress and concerned to

CHAPTER V

154
alleviate it learn to discriminate among cries. They acquire the ability to
differentiate the sounds of hunger, pain, frustration, and fear. What we
hear depends on what we listen to and what we listen for. A person who
is relatively indifferent to a child’s distress—the denizen of a neighboring
apartment, for instance—is apt to treat the child’s cries as unpleasant
background noise, an auditory intrusion to be blocked out as much as
possible. Such an auditor is conscious only of the most obtrusive proper-
ties of the cries—volume and duration. But those who care about the
child listen attentively to his cries and learn to focus on more subtle fea-
tures that correlate with causes of distress. They learn to draw distinctions
within what is for their neighbor and was once for them an undifferenti-
ated din. Were it not for their concern for the child, they would have no
reason to mark these distinctions and would never learn to hear them.

The parents react by providing different remedies in response to differ-
ent cries. The child, on realizing this, comes to use what was originally just
an expression of distress as a sign. He emits a cry of a particular kind to
communicate a certain sort of distress. To do so, he begins to distinguish
among his own feelings. He begins to differentiate feelings of frustration,
fear, hunger, and pain. His parents’ epistemic advance paves the way for
his own.

Emotions can activate dormant systems of categories, reorienting us
through deployment of classiﬁcations we would not ordinarily use. Com-
passion, for example, moves us to classify potential actions and utterances
under such headings as ‘considerate’ and ‘inconsiderate’, ‘tactful’ and
‘tactless’. Being outspoken, Clive normally says whatever comes to mind,
heedless of his interlocutors’ feelings. In a compassionate frame of mind,
however, he realizes that ‘Let’s go out and get paralytic’ is not the best
way to invite a paraplegic buddy to go drinking. Compassion then sensi-
tizes him to aspects of the invitation he would ordinarily overlook. These
are not particularly recondite aspects. He need only raise the issue of tact
to know how to resolve it. But unmoved by compassion, he would not
raise the issue.

Emotions also underwrite reclassiﬁcation. Remarks I originally count as
friendly banter I reconstrue as ridicule when dislike for their utterer or
sympathy for their target or discomfort over their tone awakens me to
the teasing’s nasty undercurrent. An action I initially consider optional—
attending a reception or contributing to a charity, for example—I recon-
strue as prima facie obligatory when gratitude moves me to appreciate that
my participation would please or beneﬁt my benefactor.

Both activation of dormant categories and reassignment across active
categories can occur without discovery of new facts. Emotions often effect
changes in emphasis, leading us to revise our assessments of features we
were already—if dimly—aware of.

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

155
Emotions can of course provoke discovery. They incite us to investi-
gate, motivate us to persevere, supply categories and standards of rele-
vance to structure our searches. My curiosity about muskrats may impel
me to study them assiduously. It may direct my attention, heighten my
sensitivity, and extend my endurance, thereby enabling me to discover a
multitude of hitherto unknown facts about the critters. My trust in Wilma
may induce me to look for exculpatory evidence, when the case against her
looks solid. And seeking such evidence, I may ﬁnd it. To be sure, success
is not guaranteed. My search may be fruitless. Or it may turn up the smok-
ing gun that settles the case against Wilma, and thereby shows my trust to
have been misplaced.

Even worse, emotions can inspire wishful thinking, leading us to mis-
read evidence, to falsely believe we have found the facts we wanted to ﬁnd.
No more than other insights are deliverances of emotion certain. They are
initially tenable but must promote reﬂective equilibrium to qualify as fully
tenable. Indeed, the phenomenon of wishful thinking might seem inimi-
cal to the epistemology I advocate. The worry is that a fact I wanted to
ﬁnd and wrongly believe I have found threatens to mesh with my system
of thought far better than an accurate assessment of the situation would.
Being favorably disposed toward Wilma, I harbor a variety of commit-
ments that accord with her innocence but are at odds with her guilt. Not
wanting to believe her guilty of scientiﬁc fraud, I manage to ﬁnd what I
take to be her original data. These, I believe, constitute genuine experi-
mental ﬁndings and vindicate her claim to have conducted the research
she allegedly faked. My credulous construal of the data, being believed, is
initially tenable. Since it meshes with my other beliefs about Wilma, it
seems readily incorporable into my system of thought, hence fully tenable.
But my construal is wrong. The data are ﬁctitious, having been fabricated
to cover up her fraud.

If wishful thinking so easily conduces to reﬂective equilibrium, my the-
ory is in trouble. Credulousness is hardly an epistemic virtue. But in as-
suming that its accord with my beliefs about Wilma earns my construal a
place in a tenable system, we go too fast. For a variety of other commit-
ments weigh against its incorporation—commitments about scientiﬁc
methodology, about evidence of scientiﬁc fraud, even about the dangers
of wishful thinking. The irreproducibility of Wilma’s results, the suspi-
ciously convenient timing of my discovery, the damning alternative con-
strual of the data, the fact that I would not normally take such data as
sufﬁcient for vindication—all tell against the tenability of my belief. More-
over, as we have seen, mine are not the only commitments relevant to the
tenability of my views. That other members of the scientiﬁc community
consider the data part of the fraud rather than evidence against it endows
that construal with initial tenability as well. To earn my belief a place in a

CHAPTER V

156
tenable system of thought then requires deﬂecting or discrediting a host
of commitments like these. And it requires doing so in a way that we can
on reﬂection accept. Integrating felicitous ﬁndings into a tenable system
is far from easy. The cognitive costs of special pleading are in general
higher than we can in good conscience pay. Since wishful thinking never
confers more than initial tenability and, if recognized as such does not
even confer that, it does not subvert the epistemic enterprise. For it pro-
vides no quick and easy route to acceptability.

TENABILITY

We would not and should not credit the outpourings of a deranged mind.
Despite their initial tenability, we have ample reason to dismiss them as
distortions. Nor should we credit deliverances of a deranged faculty of
mind. So if, as tradition has it, passion disables reason, then despite their
initial tenability, commitments that emotions embody ought to be dis-
missed. Even if emotions give rise to initially tenable commitments, it
does not follow that they advance understanding. The challenge then is to
show that emotions contribute to fully tenable systems of thought.

Few would deny that much that we fear is in fact dangerous; much
that we cherish is actually valuable; much that repels us, genuinely repul-
sive. Nor is this a coincidence. Many emotions are sensitive to informa-
tion, being elicited, modiﬁed, reinforced, and extinguished by ﬁndings
of fact. The discovery that David has furthered my cause awakens my grat-
itude toward him. Awareness of the extenuating circumstances moderates
my disappointment in Denise. Reports of Diane’s continued success
strengthen my conﬁdence in her. News of Duncan’s demise extinguishes
my hope for his recovery. This is not to say that such emotions are wholly
determined by ﬁndings of fact. Fiona may continue to fear frogs even
after she learns that they pose no threat. Patterns of attention become
habitual, and habits can be hard to break. Moreover, if Fiona’s fear of
frogs plays a central role in her psychology, the discovery that her fear is
groundless may be insufﬁcient to dislodge it. Still, to the extent that emo-
tions are information-sensitive, the more accurate our relevant informa-
tion, the better attuned our emotions will be to their surroundings. As
Stephen comes to distinguish venomous from nonvenomous snakes, his
indiscriminate fear of snakes is apt to evolve into a more discriminating
detector of danger.

Putting the matter in this way may be somewhat misleading. It may
suggest that emotions function as vehicles for views that are antecedently
adopted and independently justiﬁed. Sometimes they do. Often though,
the cognitive commitments emotions embody have no separate claim on
the subject’s epistemic allegiance. Attunement then occurs when feedback

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

157
modiﬁes the emotion itself. Seeing garter snakes handled without ill ef-
fect, Stephen ceases to fear them. And inasmuch as they no longer excite
his fear, he no longer considers them dangerous.

Overpowering emotions like abject terror, blind rage, or rapt infatua-
tion do not typically present themselves as opportunities to advance un-
derstanding. Ordinarily they call for action, not contemplation. No one in
the grip of stark terror is likely to use her emotion as a scalpel for dissecting
fear and its objects. She has more pressing matters to attend to. Does the
violence with which the violent passions present themselves undermine
my effort to integrate emotions into epistemology?

Undeniably, overwhelming emotions sometimes short-circuit reason.
The question is what to make of this. We might take it to demonstrate that
emotion as such is antithetical to the advancement of understanding. If
emotion ever short-circuits reason, emotion is never to be trusted. Before
drawing such a drastic conclusion, though, we should recall certain paral-
lels with perception. Very bright light is blinding and often causes after-
images. Very loud noise is deafening and may occasion a variety of subse-
quent auditory distortions—echoes, a buzzing in the ear, and so on. But
even though the visual and auditory systems can be overwhelmed, it
would be unreasonable to expect epistemology to exclude all their deliver-
ances. Rather, we need to learn when perceptual deliverances are not to be
trusted. Likewise, I suggest, with emotions. Rather than exclude their
deliverances entirely, epistemology should delineate the circumstances
when they are untrustworthy.

We might then follow Hume and look askance at the violent passions,
while remaining more sanguine about the epistemic prospects of the con-
tributions of the calm passions. Terror would be disqualiﬁed, but trepida-
tion would remain a source of initially tenable commitments. Clearly this
is a preferable stance. But I think we can do better still. For it is not the
case that even so violent a passion as terror is always cognitively incapaci-
tating. Emotions excited by the arts typically are muted and displaced. So
it is possible, and may be proﬁtable, to use the terror a Hitchcock ﬁlm
inspires as a source of insight. We may ﬁnd that modulations in our fear
correlate with signiﬁcant features of the ﬁlm—features we would other-
wise overlook. And we may learn to detect in ourselves subtle emotional
nuances that we had previously lumped indiscriminately together under
the label ‘fear’. The insights we thus glean typically project beyond the
aesthetic realm. We recognize the newfound nuances in our everyday
emotional responses and use those responses as detectors of hitherto un-
recognized aspects of the objects that occasion them.4 This clearly is a
cognitive advance.

4 Nelson Goodman, Languages of Art (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1968), 245–255.

158

CHAPTER V

Reﬁnement of the sensibilities increases emotion’s epistemic yield. The
undifferentiated category ‘fear’ engenders the initially tenable expectation
that danger looms. Reﬁnements such as alarm, consternation, trepidation,
and dread register differences in magnitude, imminence, and likelihood of
the dangers they portend. They thus engender initially tenable assess-
ments of a danger’s magnitude, proximity, and probability. When such
emotions are reasonable, the assessments they register are apt to be sound.
Reasonable emotions attune their subjects to their environments. Reﬁne-
ments amount to ﬁne-tuning.

Emotions serve as distant early warning systems. Over time they can
develop into acutely sensitive detectors of subliminal cues, often affording
a measure of epistemic access before other, more obvious evidence is avail-
able. My growing anxiety about Arthur constitutes reason to consider his
situation alarming, even before I can cite speciﬁc grounds for concern. My
pity for Polly constitutes reason to think her unfortunate even before I can
identify clear signs of misfortune. Emotions do not just provide early inti-
mations, though. They attune their subjects and organize their domains
so that further, surer evidence discloses itself. The pattern of attention my
emotion engenders may be what enables me to recognize the evidence of
Polly’s unhappiness or Arthur’s deterioration for what it is.

Emotions adapt to their environments. Early assessments of danger, for
instance, may be quite wide of the mark. We start out fearing things we
should not and failing to fear things that we should. Over time, however,
feedback reinforces some fears and discredits others. Gradually fear con-
verges on danger. It comes to serve as an indicator of actual, not just
apparent, danger. This is not to say that either actual or apparent danger
is easy to identify. Emotions occur not in isolation but in intricate net-
works of interanimating attitudes. What is untroubling in one psychologi-
cal setting may be deeply disturbing in another. An atheist and a funda-
mentalist are apt, for example, to feel differently about the perils of
blasphemy. Where the fundamentalist fears divine retribution, the atheist
may fear social censure. If either has internalized the relevant religious
values, he may reasonably fear the psychological cost of violating its
taboos. To complicate matters further, actions and objects are sometimes
endowed with idiosyncratic symbolic signiﬁcance. In such cases they occa-
sion reactions because of what they symbolize to a given subject. Thus the
atheist might be afraid to blaspheme, not out of religious conviction but
because to him blasphemy signiﬁes the total rejection of parental author-
ity. A subject’s fear of blasphemy thus may embody the (perhaps inarticu-
late) view that blasphemy poses a spiritual threat, a social threat, or a direct
or indirect psychological threat. Although they may be hard to distin-
guish, these are different attitudes. They constitute frames of mind that
orient their subjects to different real or apparent dangers.

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

159
Experience is limited. So fear should never be considered a failsafe test
of danger. Coincidences confuse, leading us to fear innocuous concomi-
tants of genuine perils. Dangers we escape unscathed often fail to leave
their mark. Dangers we have yet to encounter may have little inﬂuence on
our mind sets. A sensibility ﬁnely attuned to the perils of urban living may
be woefully insensitive to dangers in the wild. My purpose though is not
to show that emotions always embody tenable commitments, but only
that the initial tenability of the commitments emotions embody is not in
general gratuitous. Their being embodied is a nonnegligible, albeit imper-
fect indication of tenability.

Even better than generally crediting or discrediting emotions as sources
of understanding would be to distinguish those that are creditable from
those that are not. For emotions are not epistemically of a piece. Those we
retain purely out of habit or irrational need are unlikely to serve as con-
duits of tenable commitments. Those that are duly sensitive to informa-
tion fare better. Reﬁned sensibilities are apt to be better conduits than
crude ones. That a novice is afraid to ride a horse is some reason, but
perhaps not much, to consider the horse dangerous. That expert equestri-
ans are afraid is a strong indication that the horse is not safe to ride.

Emotions are subject to public evaluation. We regularly criticize one
another for being unjustiﬁably angry, overly optimistic, or needlessly con-
cerned. We credit one another with being rightly resentful, justiﬁably
proud, or entitled to grieve. And we often achieve consensus about such
matters.

The possibility of assessing emotions presupposes the existence of (per-
haps tacit) standards of assessment. The fact that independent assessors so
often agree indicates that the standards are shared. The possibility of chal-
lenging and defending assessments by argument indicates that the stan-
dards are more than the coincidence of converging idiosyncrasies. And the
fact that resolution of such arguments often turns on correct characteriza-
tion of relevant circumstances indicates that our standards measure the
appropriateness of emotions to contexts.

EMOTIONAL HONESTY

Emotions need not be acknowledged in order to function epistemically.
Like self-avowed emotions, suppressed rage and unacknowledged anxiety
structure experience and orient us toward objects. We do not have to
know what our emotions are to have our world structured by them. This
is not to say that a suppressed emotion and its confessed counterpart pro-
vide the same orientation. Repression clearly gives rise to orientations of
its own. Other modes of denial or self-deception probably do so as well.
Nor is it to say that unacknowledged emotions advance understanding as

CHAPTER V

160
much or as well as confessed ones do. But initial tenability attaches to the
deliverances of unacknowledged emotions just as to those of their con-
fessed counterparts. For initial tenability derives from a commitment’s
being held, not from its adherent’s knowing that it is held. Nor does our
inability to avow the emotion that embodies it prevent a commitment
from entering into a tenable system. Indeed, if Freud is right, humanity’s
greatest epistemic advances have been fueled by emotions too awful to
acknowledge. Insofar as emotions deﬁne patterns of attention then, they
can advance understanding whether or not they are avowed.

Still, emotional honesty pays epistemic dividends. In knowing how she
feels about something, a subject knows what she thinks of it. Self-aware-
ness then affords epistemic access to the cognitive commitments emotions
embody. These may be commitments the subject never expressly enter-
tained, even ones she would be loathe to acknowledge as her own. So her
emotions may disclose convictions she has no other way to discover. In
appreciating that she is afraid of frogs, for example, Fiona recognizes that
she thinks frogs are dangerous. In appreciating that her emotion embar-
rasses her, she recognizes that she considers frogs unworthy of fear. Had
she been unable to own up to her emotions, Fiona would be unaware
both of her attitude toward frogs and of her attitude toward her attitude
toward frogs.

Revelations reverberate. Roger’s recognition that he was relieved to
learn that he had lost the election discloses to him that he had been ambiv-
alent about winning, that he feared the loss of privacy that accompanies
public ofﬁce, and that despite his public persona, he is in fact quite shy.
Since many attitudes have attitudes as their objects, emotional honesty
can be a fecund source of self-knowledge, disclosing a variety of emotions
and cognitions nested one within another.

Moreover, because emotions are sensitive to circumstances, their oc-
currence constitutes evidence that circumstances of a given kind obtain.
In recognizing an emotion then, we gain access to that evidence. Friendly
and malicious teasing, for example, evoke distinct—though not always
easily distinguishable—feelings. By learning to tell those feelings apart and
honestly assessing her own responses, the teaser’s target gains insight into
her interlocutor’s attitudes—attitudes he is apt to mask, sometimes even
from himself. To be sure, self-ascriptions are not self-certifying. They ac-
quire epistemic credentials in the same way other commitments do—
through incorporation into tenable systems of thought. So Fiona’s con-
fession that she fears frogs is tenable only if it ﬁgures in an appropriate
tenable system. That she believes she fears frogs does not make it so. Nor
does Flora’s contention that she feels victimized by Fred’s banter insure
that that is how she feels. Perhaps she is just uncomfortable about being
the object of his attention at all.

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

161
Self-deception is a cognitive handicap then because it cuts off avenues
of epistemic access. Unable to acknowledge her feelings of victimization,
Flora lacks access to the evidence of hostility that Fred’s teasing presents.
Were she attuned to her emotions, she would be better able to understand
Fred. Insensitivity similarly incapacitates. Because he cannot empathize
with the recipients of his largesse, the philanthropist is mystiﬁed when
they consider his gift patronizing, and bewildered by their evident lack of
gratitude. His lack of empathy prevents him from understanding his bene-
ﬁciaries’ perspective and undermines his prospects of doing the good he is
trying to do.

Earlier I urged that emotions need not be felt. Still, they often are. And
where felt, emotions present themselves to their subjects as they do to no
one else. If repudiating privileged access requires disqualifying feelings as
sources of insight into our own emotions, it goes too far. Surely feeling
delighted is not evidentially unrelated to being delighted. The issue is not
whether feelings afford a distinctive mode of access to emotions but
whether that mode of access confers epistemic privilege. It does not. A
person can feel angry without being angry. So her feeling is not self-certi-
fying. And there may be ample reason to deny that she is angry even
though she feels angry. So her feeling does not override the other consid-
erations that bear on the characterization of her state. We may realize—
and she may agree—that despite her feeling, she is not really angry, just
tired, discouraged, frustrated, and sorry about the way things turned out.
Feelings yield initially tenable self-ascriptions. But such self-ascriptions are
not self-certifying any more than other initially tenable commitments are.

CLASSIFICATION

Feelings do not characterize themselves. We have to learn how delight,
dismay, compunction, and the like, feel before our agitations and compo-
sures afford grounds for self-ascription. Nor is this merely acquiring an
ability to attach labels to homogeneous, antecedently individuated affects.
For in different contexts the same feeling can register different emotions,
and the same emotion manifest itself in different feelings. A feeling of
reluctance registers compunction or misgivings depending on whether
one’s reservations are morally or prudentially based. Loathing may be felt
as dismay or delight depending on whether the object of one’s disaffec-
tion fares well or badly. Feelings then do not ﬁx the character of the emo-
tional realm. Unless we already recognize the various emotions, we can-
not tell what or how feelings bear on them.

If, as I have suggested, an emotion involves a pattern of attention, then
identifying an emotion involves recognizing such a pattern. And taking a
feeling or behavior or salience as a manifestation of an emotion involves

This is a public enterprise. It proceeds initially in settings where suitable
elicitors and responses are, and are known to be, relatively unequivocal
and intersubjectively accessible. Seeing her pupils observe a playmate
laugh spontaneously upon catching the ball he plainly wanted to catch, a
teacher might describe him to them as delighted. Her pupils—including
the child who caught the ball—begin to associate delight with satisfaction
of desires and with laughter. Over time, as they encounter a variety of
examples, the children become aware of delight’s characteristic features.
They note that its subjects tend to seek out occasions of delight, that they
focus on pleasurable aspects of situations that delight them, that they are
apt to overlook or minimize difﬁculties such situations present, and so
forth. They learn to identify delight’s more subtle manifestations and to
recognize it in a variety of settings. As they come to identify in themselves
the pattern of attention that characterizes delight, the children discover
that certain feelings are elements of it. They learn then to recognize feel-
ings of their own as feelings of delight and to take those feelings as revela-
tory of a complex attitudinal structure. They thus acquire the ability to use
their feelings as a basis for self-ascription.

Patterns of attention interweave. And much of our learning to identify
emotions involves learning to recognize the various patterns in the intri-
cate tapestries that constitute our emotional lives. As the children mature
then, they learn how the pattern for delight intertwines with other pat-
terns. They learn to recognize it as, for instance, an elaboration of a gen-
eral schema for enjoyment or as occurring, among other places, where the
patterns for enthusiasm and a sense of accomplishment merge. Eventually
the children come to appreciate the ways other attitudes affect the pattern
and its manifestations. They thus discover that delight can be muted, ex-
aggerated, feigned, or masked. And they learn to recognize indications
that such is the case.

CHAPTER V

162
construing it as part of such a pattern. It is not distress simpliciter but
distress as an element of a particular matrix that qualiﬁes as a feeling of
dismay. So learning to recognize feelings of dismay requires learning to
locate distress in the appropriate matrix.

Context inﬂuences emotion. Feelings that qualify as love against one
background amount to infatuation against another. So accurate ascription
of emotions requires appreciating their psychological milieu. A callow ad-
olescent’s inability to distinguish love from infatuation may stem from his
failure to recognize or appreciate the signiﬁcance of the matrix of attitudes
within which his affection occurs. He may, for example, have no idea
whether his attitude is primarily self- or other-regarding—that is, whether
he mainly values his beloved for herself or for the way his affection (re-
quited or not) reﬂects on him. Because he cannot tell how it ﬁgures in his
psychology, he is ill-equipped to identify his emotion. Nor is this problem

163
peculiar to self-ascription. His buddies might be equally oblivious to the
network of attitudes that inform his emotion.

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

As we become more discriminating, our bases for ascription increase in
complexity, sophistication, and interrelation. We come to appreciate the
myriad ways emotions and other attitudes inform one another and inﬂu-
ence behavior. We recognize, for example, that the desire to be consid-
ered cool often reverses fear’s polarity, causing it to manifest itself as
bravado. We discover that Sarah’s civility so constrains her conduct that
her suppressed rage betrays itself only in the punctilious politeness she
shows to her adversaries. We realize that Jon’s faith in his daughter’s
abilities both moderates his worry and exacerbates his irritation over her
mediocre grades.

Learning to identify emotions thus involves learning what sorts of situ-
ations typically elicit a particular emotion, what saliencies it gives rise to,
what range of verbal and nonverbal behaviors generally manifest it, and
what sorts of defeaters undermine the foregoing generalizations. Part of
what we learn is how complicated emotions are, how deeply and intri-
cately interwoven into our fabric of commitments.

A single situation can elicit any of a fairly broad range of nondeviant
emotions. For example, suffering might evoke pity, outrage, contempt, or
fear. A single emotion, moreover, can manifest itself in a wide variety of
behaviors. Fear may reveal itself in blenching, bravado, whimpering, or
whistling in the dark. Ascribing emotions involves construing behavior in
context, in tailoring our general knowledge to the particulars of a situa-
tion. Knowing how nervousness normally affects Nina, and realizing that
the prospect of public speaking is apt to unsettle her, we readily recognize
her cough as a sign of anxiety, even though we would consider a similarly
situated stranger’s cough evidence of catarrh. Aware of the Masai custom
of inuring themselves to pain, we take the wince of a Masai as a sign of
agony, even though we would treat the wince of a similarly afﬂicted Amer-
ican as evidence of mild discomfort.

Individual feelings and behaviors arise from and belong to patterns of
attention that characterize emotions. Thus reactions that are highly am-
biguous in isolation are often unequivocal as parts of such patterns. Both
joy and sorrow can reduce a person to tears. Brimming eyes alone then do
not afford enough evidence to safely ascribe either emotion. But we rarely
encounter brimming eyes alone. Minimally we have access to other as-
pects of the subject’s demeanor. Often we know a lot more—about her
behavior and attitudes prior and subsequent to her weeping, her character
and commitments, the nature of the events that occasion her tears, and so
on. Tears accompanied by a wide grin, evoked by the news that the subject
has just been awarded the Nobel Prize, are difﬁcult to construe as signs of
sorrow. Likewise, a feeling that is ambiguous in isolation is often unequiv-

CHAPTER V

164
ocal in context. An agitation that belongs to a pattern of attention high-
lighting dangers and risks may unequivocally announce itself as forebod-
ing, even if the same feeling in different surroundings would qualify as
anticipation. Moreover, within a single pattern there may be a multiplicity
of feelings that, as part of the pattern, qualify and can be recognized as a
single emotion. My dislike of Fred may manifest itself as enjoyment at his
discomﬁture, resentment over his success, distress on encountering him,
and so on. Distinct feelings then instantiate a single emotion.

Behaviors are indicative of patterns of salience. Frequently we can tell
what someone is focusing on by the way she reacts, and identify her emo-
tional state by the features she focuses on. That Pat is relentlessly raising
practical objections shows that she is attending to the project’s downside
risks, hence that she has misgivings about it. Pam’s ethical objections re-
veal that she is focusing on the morally dubious aspects of the plan. She
has compunctions. Paul’s cavalier dismissal of his colleagues’ concerns, his
failure to see the patterns they discern, shows that he is sanguine about
the project. By attending to such behaviors, we learn what it is to have
misgivings, compunctions, or to be sanguine, and we learn to recognize
such states in ourselves as well as in others.

Emotions that take objects realize dispositions to respond differentially
to particular classes. Fear, for example, is a differential response to dan-
gers, and pity a differential response to misfortunes. The classes in ques-
tion are often ones we cannot identify without recourse to emotions. Per-
haps there are emotively neutral criteria for dangers and misfortunes. But
we would be hard put to say what repulsive things have in common be-
yond their propensity to repel or what amusing things have in common
aside from their tendency to amuse. Conceivably we will someday uncover
such commonalities. But as things stand, emotions afford epistemic access
to otherwise undemarcated and therefore inaccessible classes.

To say we have access to such classes only via emotions is not to say that
each of us can appeal only to her own emotions. We appeal to the emo-
tions of others as well. A pathologist can recognize that an excised tumor
is repulsive, without being personally repelled. All she need know is that
it is the sort of thing that generally repels. To be sure, not everything that
repels anyone belongs to the class of the repulsive. Emotions can be mis-
placed. When they are, a frame of mind is activated in the absence of a
suitable target. Thus, for example, a system of saliencies and a network of
attitudes called for by repulsive objects may be activated even though no
such object is present. Although Peter is repelled when he catches a
glimpse of it, a wet dish cloth is not genuinely repulsive.

Perception provides an illuminating parallel. Even if hearing affords our
only access to the vocal realm, that a voice sounds strident to me does not
make it so. Sometimes circumstances conspire to make a melodious voice

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

165
sound harsh. So a voice’s membership in the class of the strident is not
settled by an individual’s perception of it. Nor in deciding how to classify
a sound are we restricted to our own occurrent sensations. We appeal to
the ways it appears to others and to the ways it would appear to us in
suitably different circumstances. We know of conditions that distort or
mislead and can often tell whether they obtain. We recognize, for exam-
ple, that ampliﬁcation frequently makes melodious voices sound strident.
On the basis of such considerations, we start to develop standards of evi-
dence that specify when and to what extent perceptual assessments of stri-
dency are to be trusted. Over time, as we gain experience and accumulate
evidence, our standards improve.

To characterize our revisions as improvements does not require inde-
pendent access to the class of the strident. For reﬁnement here is not a
matter of adjusting our aim at an already known target. Rather, we modify
our standards to integrate our ascriptions and grounds for ascription into
increasingly detailed, increasingly comprehensive tenable systems. When
we realize that ampliﬁcation makes normally melodious voices sound stri-
dent, we conclude that ampliﬁcation distorts, and dismiss or discount as-
sessments of stridency that fail to compensate for its effects. When we
recognize that a medication induces hearing loss in the lower registers, we
distrust the judgments of stridency made under the inﬂuence of the drug.
When we notice that sexists are prone to characterize women’s demands
as strident on the basis of content rather than tone, we discredit their
characterizations of female voices. Although we have no reason to think
that our current standards are perfect, and no independent check on their
reliability, we justiﬁably take them to afford epistemic access to the class of
strident sounds. They function as fallible indicators of membership in a
class whose extension is not wholly known.

Similarly we develop standards that specify when and to what extent
emotional reactions afford evidence of membership in their correlative
classes. Not all do. A sufﬁciently besotted swain might delight in his be-
loved’s laundry list. But that would hardly qualify it for inclusion in the
class of the delightful. And a sufﬁciently censorious critic may fail to de-
light in anything. But that would not show the class to be null. Setting
tenable standards of evidence here is not easy. For the route from individ-
ual response to correlative class is circuitous. Emotional reactions are
often idiosyncratic, being heavily inﬂuenced by the matrix of attitudes that
embed them, the circumstances that give rise to them, and the sequences
of events they belong to. Still, over time we learn to control for historical
accident and personal idiosyncrasy, as well as for variability and volatility
in individual responses. We learn, that is, how to use our own and one
another’s delight as evidence of membership in the class of the delightful.
Our evolving standards of evidence are, of course, fallible. Still, as they

CHAPTER V

166
are integrated into increasingly tenable systems of thought, they afford an
increasingly tenable presumption that the reactions they credit are indica-
tive of membership in the class of the delightful. Nevertheless, we cannot
responsibly claim that they are accurate enough to demarcate the bound-
aries of that class exactly.

Reﬁnement of the sensibilities affords epistemic access to less populous,
more homogeneous classes. Where regret supplies access to the class of
misfortunes, remorse targets the subclass consisting of the misfortunes the
subject is responsible for. So in developing a capacity for remorse, the
subject gains access to that subclass. To be sure, access is neither immedi-
ate nor direct. Suppose Meagan’s recognition that she considers herself
responsible for particular misfortunes is accompanied by a distinctive feel-
ing of regret. Although that reaction does not arise in response to every
misfortune she regrets, it does arise in response to some misfortunes she
had not previously considered herself responsible for. On realizing this,
she has reason to suspect that she subliminally holds herself responsible
for the latter misfortunes as well. This in turn gives her grounds for sus-
pecting that she is in fact responsible for them. Such a suspicion is, of
course, defeasible. Meagan might easily feel remorse when she ought not
to. Or the pangs she has been experiencing might be something other
than remorse. But just as taking something to be blue is reason to think
that it is blue, taking oneself to be responsible is reason to think that one
is responsible. Remorse about a situation embeds the initially tenable be-
lief that one is responsible for it. Like other emotions, it can be misplaced.
But once we have remorse in our emotional repertoire, we are in a posi-
tion to fashion and hone standards that tell when a subject’s remorse re-
ﬂects real responsibility for the misfortune it concerns.

Our interests, practices, objectives, and institutions inﬂuence the
course that reﬁnement of the sensibilities takes. Because morality provides
an incentive to identify the misfortunes we are responsible for, it gives us
reason to focus on the regrets those particular misfortunes occasion. It
thus puts us in a position to notice their distinctive features. Our concern
with responsibility then provides a perspective from which we can distin-
guish remorse from mere regret. Having no particular incentive to distin-
guish misfortunes that occur on Mondays, I have no reason to attend
especially to the regrets that Monday’s misfortunes occasion. As a result I
do not put myself in a position to notice features peculiar to misfortunes
occurring on Mondays. Unless there is a more salient or signiﬁcant char-
acterization of those misfortunes, I am unlikely to develop an emotion
that targets them.

The members of any collection are alike in some respects and different
in others. So by itself the principle that like cases should be treated alike
avails us little. Before that principle can do any work, it needs to be supple-

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

167
mented by standards that specify appropriate likenesses and differences.
Emotional reactions often ﬁgure in the assessments of such standards.
They make ﬁne discriminations that can cut across, and thereby cast doubt
on, the adequacy of accepted categories. When we feel differently about
cases that are currently classiﬁed as alike or feel the same about cases cur-
rently classiﬁed as different, our emotions afford grounds for reevaluating
a classiﬁcatory scheme.

If, for example, we ﬁnd ourselves as outraged over being intentionally
misled as we are over being lied to, the line conventional morality draws
between truth telling and lying looks to be misplaced. Our reaction sug-
gests that imparting misleading truths is as objectionable as imparting
falsehoods. If so, moral categories need to be reconﬁgured and moral
rules reframed. Evidently the moral standing of an utterance depends on
the truth value the speaker ascribes to the belief she seeks to convey, not
the truth values of the vehicles used to convey it. If drug dependence in
victims of painful medical conditions does not excite the same distress as
drug dependence in otherwise healthy subjects, a legal or moral system
that considers all narcotics addiction on a par appears too pat. Our reac-
tions lead us to wonder whether drug dependence as such is always a bad
thing. They remind us that there are other places where lines might plausi-
bly be drawn, and prompt us to investigate whether a partition that better
reﬂects our emotional responses would be more tenable.

There is, of course, no assurance that it would. Emotions can be manip-
ulated, so reactions to particular cases might mislead. And even if they do
not mislead, a system that reﬂected the difference they discern might vio-
late other, more tenable commitments. Moreover, an emotional reaction
that convinces us that a new line needs to be drawn typically does not
determine where to draw it. Even if compassion for the suffering under-
mines the wholesale condemnation of narcotics addiction, it does not
specify the conditions under which addiction is tolerable. Emotions alone
do not effect a realignment of moral categories. But by detecting un-
acknowledged kinships and differences, they supply motives and resources
for realignment. They perform the second-order epistemic function in as-
sessing the adequacy of ﬁrst-order systems of classiﬁcation.

EMOTION AND THE RANGE OF EPISTEMOLOGY

In crediting emotion and its equally dubious confederates—metaphor,
ﬁction, and exempliﬁcation—with epistemic standing, I might seem to
extend epistemology’s scope unduly. Traditional theories of knowledge,
after all, construe their range more narrowly. From within my theory, the
response is clear. Epistemology must comprehend such matters because
they affect the tenability of systems of thought. But, one might charge,

CHAPTER V

168
that just shows what is wrong with the theory. It admits within epistemol-
ogy’s purview matters that do not belong. How can this challenge be met?
I shall defer to the next chapter my defense of the inclusion of ﬁction,
metaphor, and exempliﬁcation within the realm of epistemology. In con-
cluding this chapter I want to argue that the cognitive functions emotions
perform are ones epistemology cannot responsibly ignore. I have shown
that emotions orient their subjects, focus attention, and supply grounds
for classifying objects as like or unlike. So if I can demonstrate that episte-
mology must address matters of orientation, focus, and categorization, I
will have made my case.

Such matters do not admit of support by empirical evidence. So a the-
ory that takes its task to be identifying the conditions under which evi-
dence supports a hypothesis might try to bracket them, to construe them
as lying at a distance from epistemology’s proper concerns. Such a theory
might, for example, determine whether available evidence warrants ac-
cepting the sentence ‘All vegetables are nutritious’ under some interpreta-
tion of the predicates ‘vegetable’ and ‘nutritious’. But it will not afford the
resources for evaluating the classiﬁcation that that interpretation reﬂects.
This might seem unobjectionable, even reasonable. So long as we know
where the lines are drawn, we know what accepting the sentence amounts
to. There may be pragmatic grounds for favoring one partition of the
domain over others, but the impracticality of a scheme that includes pine
cones in or excludes artichokes from the class of vegetables is hardly epis-
temology’s concern.

The difﬁculty is that the grounds for rejecting a hypothesis sometimes
derive from the categories in terms of which it is framed. In evaluating
‘All emeralds are grue’, for example, the issue is not whether the evidence
at hand supports the hypothesis but whether the hypothesis admits of
evidential support. To decide that requires assessing the suitability of
the category ‘grue’ for induction. Epistemology cannot evade the prob-
lem of induction, hence cannot ignore the challenge the grue paradox
poses. To address that challenge requires recognizing that the partition
of the domain that a category scheme supplies is a proper object of epi-
stemic scrutiny.

Nor can epistemology distance itself from matters of orientation. The
Copernican hypothesis was originally proposed as a factual claim. As such,
it was clearly within epistemology’s purview. With the repudiation of ab-
solute space, however, its status becomes trickier. Neither the Earth nor
the sun is absolutely in motion or absolutely at rest. For all motion is
relative to a frame of reference. Because nature favors no one frame of
reference over the others, there is no saying absolutely whether the Earth
moves. Still, the denial of absolute space does not exempt the Copernican
hypothesis from epistemological scrutiny. It just shifts the grounds for

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

169
assessment. Even if there is no saying absolutely what is in motion and
what is at rest, there is something to be said for taking some things to be
in motion and others at rest. What is to be said for the Copernican hy-
pothesis is that when the sun is treated as ﬁxed and the Earth as moving,
the solar system displays an order that makes sense of astronomical obser-
vations and ﬁts planetary astronomy into a more comprehensive physical
theory. The heliocentric perspective thus affords epistemic access to regu-
larities in celestial motion that the geocentric perspective obscures. The
elaboration and evaluation of such a defense is the business of epistemol-
ogy. What is at issue is the acceptability not of a law or a factual claim but
of an orientation. If the defense succeeds, it demonstrates the tenability of
adopting a particular frame of reference.

Even salience is subject to assessment. In arguing for punctuated equi-
librium, evolutionary biologists focus on, rather than glossing over, gaps
in the fossil record. Such gaps have long been recognized. The theory of
punctuated equilibrium highlights them, insisting that evidence for the
course of evolution consists not just in the forms we ﬁnd but also in the
fact that we fail to ﬁnd ‘intermediate’ forms. An epistemological assess-
ment of the theory of punctuated equilibrium must decide whether the
lacunae deserve the status of evidence.

Orientation, categorization, and focus are then already within the
scope of any epistemology that accommodates science. Rather than ex-
tending epistemology’s range, I have shown that epistemology’s acknowl-
edged range comprehends the functions emotions perform.

