 
 
 
 

 

 

 

CREATIVE EUROPE 

 

Culture Sub-programme 

 

SUPPORT FOR EUROPEAN 
COOPERATION PROJECTS  

 
 
 
 

GUIDELINES 

 
 

 

EAC/S16/2013 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 
2. 
 
 
3. 
4. 
5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 

Introduction 
Objective and priorities 
2.1 Objectives and priorities 
2.2 Targeted projects 
Timetable 
Available budget 
Eligibility criteria 
5.1 Formal criteria 
5.2 Eligible countries 
5.3 Eligible applicants 
5.4 Eligible projects 
5.5 Eligible activities 
5.6 Eligible period 
Exclusion criteria 
6.1 Exclusion from participation 
6.2 Exclusion from award 
6.3  Supporting documents 
Selection criteria 
7.1 Operational capacity 
7.2 Financial capacity 
7.3 Audit report 
Award criteria 
Funding conditions 
9.1 Contractual provisions and payment procedure 
9.2 Guarantee 
9.3 Principle of non-cumulative award (Double funding) 
9.4 Funding method 
Sub-contracting and award of procurement contracts 
Publicity, communication and dissemination 
Data protection 
Procedure for selection of applications 
13.1 Publication 
13.2 Registration (Participant Portal of the European Commission)  
13.3 Submission of grant applications 
13.4 Evaluation procedure 
13.5 Award decision  
13.6 Rules applicable 
13.7 Contacts 
 

7. 
 
 
 
8. 
9. 
 
 
 
 
10. 
11.  
12. 
13. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 1  Glossary 
Annex 2  Audience development 
Annex 3  Mandatory documents - Check list  
 
All  the  necessary  documentation  to  apply,  in  particular  the  online  application  form  (e-form)  and  the 
guide for applicants, can be found at:  
http://ec.europa.eu/culture/creative-europe/calls/call-eac-s16-2013-cooperation_en.htm 
 
 
 

 

2 

EAC/S16/2013 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
 
These  guidelines  are  based  on  Regulation  N°  1295/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council of 11 December 2013 establishing the Creative Europe Programme (2014 to 2020) 1. 
 
The European Commission is responsible for the implementation of the Creative Europe  Programme 
(hereafter  "the  Programme")  and  for  the  decision  to  grant  individual  European  Union  funds.  The 
Education, Audiovisual and Culture Executive Agency (hereafter "the Agency") manages the Culture 
and MEDIA Sub-programmes on behalf and under the control of the European Commission. 
 
General background information about the Creative Europe Programme can be found at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/creative-europe/ 
 
2.  OBJECTIVES AND PRIORITIES 
 
2.1 Objectives and priorities 

The main objectives of the support for cultural cooperation projects are: 

- 

- 

- 

to support the capacity of the European cultural and creative sectors to operate transnationally 
and internationally and to promote the transnational circulation of cultural and creative works 
and transnational mobility of cultural and creative players, in particular artists; 

to contribute to audience development by helping European artists/cultural professionals and 
their  works  reach  new  and  enlarged  audiences  and  improve  access  to  cultural  and  creative 
works  in  the  European  Union  (hereafter  'the  EU')  and  beyond  with  a  particular  focus  on 
children, young people, people with disabilities and underrepresented groups, by engaging in 
new and innovative ways with audiences both to retain and enlarge them, and to improve the 
experience and deepen the relationship with current and future audiences; 

to contribute to innovation and creativity in the field of culture, for instance through artistic 
innovation,  the  testing  of  new  business  models,  the  use  of  digital  technologies  and  the 
promotion of innovative spill-overs on other sectors. 

In order to achieve the above mentioned objectives, the cooperation projects will have to focus on one 
or more of the following priorities: 

  Priorities  in  the  field  of  reinforcing  the  cultural  and  creative  sector's  capacity  to  operate 

transnationally, are: 

- 

- 

- 

supporting actions providing cultural and creative players with skills, competences and know-
how  that  contribute  to  strengthening  the  cultural  and  creative  sectors,  including  encouraging 
adaptation to digital technologies, testing innovative approaches to audience development and 
testing of new business and management models; 

supporting  actions  enabling  cultural  and  creative  players  to  cooperate  internationally  and  to 
internationalise  their  careers  and  activities  in  the  Union  and  beyond,  when  possible  on  the 
basis of long-term strategies; 

providing support to strengthen European cultural and creative organisations and international 
networking  in order to facilitate access to professional opportunities. 

  Priorities in the field of promoting transnational circulation and mobility are: 

                                                        
1  Regulation    N°  1295/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  establishing  the  Creative  Europe 
Programme was published in the Official Journal of the European Union on 20/12/2013 (OJ L 347, p. 221). 

3 

 

EAC/S16/2013 

- 

- 

- 

supporting  international  cultural  activities,  such  as  for  instance  touring  events,  exhibitions, 
exchanges and festivals; 

supporting the circulation  of European literature with  a view to ensuring  the widest possible 
accessibility; 

supporting audience development as a means of stimulating interest in and improving access 
to European cultural and creative works and tangible and intangible cultural heritage. To find 
out more about audience development, please refer to annex 2 to these guidelines.  

This  scheme  has  a  flexible,  interdisciplinary  approach.  Projects  can  either  focus  on  one  or  more 
priorities,  at either  one  or more  points of  the value chain  in  either  one or  more  cultural  and  creative 
sectors.  

The scheme shall support, in particular, not-for-profit projects. 

On top of the specific features of the scheme and in compliance with the principle of subsidiarity, the 
supported  projects  shall  contribute  to  create  European  added  value  as  defined  in  Article  5  of 
Regulation N°1295/2013 establishing the Creative Europe Programme. 

2.2 Targeted projects 
 
This scheme offers two categories of support. Depending on the scale, needs, nature and objectives of 
the  project  (also  referred  to  as  "action"),  the  project  leader  and  the  partners  (also  referred  to  as  "the 
applicants"), will have to choose to apply for either category 1 or category 2: 
  

Category 1 – Smaller scale cooperation projects 
 

Projects  involving  a  project  leader  and  at  least  two  other  partners  having  their  legal  seat  in  at  least 
three different countries taking part in the Culture Sub-programme, with a  maximum EU funding  of  
EUR 200 000. 

 

Category 2 – Larger scale cooperation projects 
 

Projects involving a project leader and at least five other partners having their legal seat in at least six 
different  countries  taking  part  in  the  Culture  Sub-programme,  with  a  maximum  EU  funding  of  
EUR 2 000 000. 
 
Purely  illustrative  examples  of  the  kinds  of  activities  that  can  be  supported  within  projects,  if  they 
contribute  to  the  above  objectives  and  priorities,  include  the  following  (please  note  this  list  is  not 
exhaustive): 
 

-  Exchanges  of  cultural  players  with  a  view  to  capacity-building  enabling  cultural  players  to 
acquire the skills and know-how needed to adapt to their changing environment (digital shift, 
new  business  and  management  models,  new  approaches  to  audience  development,  helping 
small organisations develop business readiness in applying for bank loans). This can include 
training sessions, workshops, the preparation of materials, websites for this purpose, etc.; 

-  Exchanges  of  cultural  players  between  countries,  including  extended  stays  and  residencies, 
which  will  help  artists/cultural  professionals  with  the  development  of  their  careers.  During 
these  stays,  the  activities  can  include  artistic  creation,  including  co-creations  and  co-
productions, which are then performed or exhibited and toured between different countries. As 
far  as  possible  they  should  also  include  training  and  activities  in  audience  development  and 
interaction  with  local  communities,  including  efforts  to  reach  usually  under-represented 
groups; 

-  Cultural  organisations  (e.g.  concert  halls,  opera  houses,  theatres,  festivals,  orchestras,  music 
groups,  theatre  groups,  etc.)  from  different  countries  coming  together  to  co-produce  and/or 

 

4 

EAC/S16/2013 

perform  and  tour  in  different  venues/events  in  different  countries,  or  at  a  single  event  on 
condition that the event has a very large and recognised international reach with the capacity 
to  have  a  multiplier  effect  in  other  countries.  The  co-productions  can  include  new  or  avant-
garde  works.  Promotional  and  audience  development  activities  must  be  included  in  order  to 
attract  larger  audiences,  help  make  complex  works  accessible  to  the  audience,  and  extend 
access  to  under-represented  groups.  The  activities  should  help  artists/cultural  professionals 
with  their  careers,  help  artists  and  works  reach  more  audiences  across  Europe  and  beyond, 
help  extend  the  lifespan  of  productions  and  the  organisations  to  develop  sustainable 
cooperation with new partners in other countries and new professional opportunities for them. 
-  Transnational  exchanges  of  artefacts  with  a  particular  European  dimension:  these  do  not 
necessarily  create  new  works,  but  may  enable  new  and  existing  works  to  circulate,  for 
example, through exhibitions that tour between the different partners or through a museum in 
one country loaning exhibits to museums in other countries, with special attention being paid 
to  extending  and  enlarging  the  audiences  for  these  works,  and  extending  the  lifespan  of 
exhibitions.  

 
3.  TIMETABLE 
 
The indicative timetable for the call for proposals for 2014 is:  
 
For category 1 - Smaller scale cooperation projects: 
 
Publication of 
the call for 
proposals 
December 
2013 

Information to 
applicants 

Deadline for 
submission 

Evaluation 
period 

August 2014 

6 months 

First 
Wednesday 
of March 
2014 

 
For category 2 - Larger scale cooperation projects: 
 
Publication of 
the call for 
proposals 
December 
2013 

Deadline for 
submission 

Evaluation 
period 

6 months 

First 
Wednesday 
of March 
2014 

Information to 
applicants 

Grant 
agreements  

Start date of the 
action  

September 
2014 

September  until 
December 2014 

Grant 
agreements  

Start date of the 
action 

August 2014  October 

2014 

October - 
December 
2014 

 
The indicative timetable for the following years for the duration of the Programme is: 
 
For Category 1 - Smaller scale cooperation projects: 
 
Publication of 
the call for 
proposals 
July of year 
n-1 

Information to 
applicants 

Deadline for 
submission 

Grant 
agreements  

Evaluation 
period 

March of 
year n 

April of 
year n 

6 months 

Start date of the 
action  

May until 
December of 
year n 

First 
Wednesday 
of October of 
year n-1 

 
 

 

 

5 

EAC/S16/2013 

For category 2 - Larger scale cooperation projects: 
 
Publication of 
the call for 
proposals 
July of year 
n-1 

Deadline for 
submission 

6 months 

First 
Wednesday 
of October of 
year n-1 

Evaluation 
period 

Information to 
applicants 

March of  
year n 

Grant 
agreements  

Start date of the 
action 

May of year 
n 

June until 
December of 
year n 

 
If the deadline for submission falls on a public holiday in the applicant's country, no extension will be 
granted. Applicants must take this into account when planning their submission. 

 

4.  AVAILABLE BUDGET 
 
The total available budget for the co-financing of projects under this scheme is estimated at 70 % of 
the  total  budget  for  Creative  Europe  –  Culture  Sub-programme  (i.e.  EUR  454,8  million)  which 
amounts to around EUR 318 million over the period 2014-2020.  
 
Each year throughout the duration of the programme, the European Commission and the Agency will 
publish  an  annual  work  programme  indicating  the  budget  devoted  to  cooperation  projects  for  that 
particular year.  
 
Financial  contribution  from  the  EU  cannot  exceed  60%  of  the  total  eligible  costs  for  category  1  - 
smaller  scale  cooperation  projects  and  50%  of  the  total  eligible  costs  for  category  2  -  larger  scale 
cooperation projects. The remaining amount shall be secured by the applicants. 
 
The Agency reserves the right not to distribute all funds available.  
 
5.  ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
 
Applications which comply with the following criteria will be the subject of an in-depth evaluation. 
 
5.1  Formal criteria 

Only applications fulfilling the following conditions will be considered: 

- 

- 

submitted  in  one  of  the  EU  official  languages,  using  the  online  application  form  (e-form), 
completed  in  full,  with  all  the  required  signed  annexes  (original  signatures  or  equivalent 
required); 
and accompanied by an application package sent by post or by express courier service by the 
deadline (the postmark serves as proof for post and the registered delivery receipt of the mail 
service serves as proof for express courier service). The application package must include an 
official letter (cover letter) signed by the legal representative of the project leader, as well as 
all other mandatory documents (see list in annex 3). 

 

 
 

 

6 

EAC/S16/2013 

5.2  Eligible countries  
 
Applications from legal entities established in one of the following country categories are eligible as 
long  as  all  conditions  referred  to  in  Article  8  of  Regulation  N°  1295/2013  establishing  the  Creative 
Europe Programme are met and the Commission has entered into negotiations with the country: 

1.  EU Member States and overseas countries and territories which are eligible to participate in the 

Programme pursuant to Article 58 of Council Decision 2001/822/EC2; 

2.  Acceding  countries,  candidate  countries  and  potential  candidates  benefiting  from  a  pre-
accession strategy, in accordance with the general principles and general terms and conditions 
for  the  participation  of  those  countries  in  Union  programmes  established  in  the  respective 
Framework Agreements, Association Council Decisions or similar agreements; 

3.  EFTA  countries  which  are  parties  to  the  Agreement  on  the  EEA,  in  accordance  with  the 

provisions of the EEA Agreement; 

4.  The  Swiss  Confederation,  on  the  basis  of  a  bilateral  agreement  to  be  concluded  with  that 

country; 

5.  Countries  covered  by  the  European  Neighbourhood  Policy  in  accordance  with  the  procedures 
defined  with  those  countries  following  the  framework  agreements  providing  for  their 
participation in EU programmes. 

 

the  Creative  Europe  Programme 

The Agency may select proposals from applicants from non EU countries provided that, on the date of 
the award decision, agreements have been signed setting out the arrangements for the participation of 
those countries in the Programme established by the Regulation referred to above.   
 
An  updated  list  of  countries  that  fulfil  the  conditions  referred  to  in  Article  8  of  Regulation  N° 
1295/2013 and that the Commission has started negotiations with can be found at:  
http://ec.europa.eu/culture/creative-europe/documents/calls/eligible-countries.pdf 
 
5.3 Eligible applicants  
 
5.3.1  The  applicants  (the  project  leader  and  the  partners)  must  be  active  in  the  cultural  and  creative 
sectors as defined in article 2 of Regulation n° 1295/2013 of European Parliament and of the Council 
establishing 
repealing  Decisions  Nos 
1718/2006/EC,  1855/2006/EC  and  1041/2009/EC  and  be  legally  established  in  one  of  the  countries 
participating  in  the  Culture  Sub-programme  (referred  to  in  section  5.2  of  these  guidelines).  Proof  of 
this activity will be required (such as for instance statutes).  
 
The project leader will submit the application to the Agency on behalf of all partners. Consequently, 
applications  must  include  mandate  letters  from  partner  organisations  confirming  their  participation 
(original signatures or equivalent required). 
 
5.3.2  When  submitting  their  application,  both  project  leader  and  partners  must  be  in  a  position  to 
demonstrate  their  existence  as  a  legal  person  for  at  least  2  years  on  the  date  of  the  deadline  for 
submission referred to in section 3 of these guidelines.   
 
Natural persons may not apply for a grant 
 
5.3.3 In  order to submit  an  application, applicants  (the project leader and  the partners)  must provide 
their  Participant  Identification  Code  (PIC)  in  the  application  form.  The  PIC  can  be  obtained  by 

(2014-2020)  and 

                                                        
2  Council  Decision  2001/822/EC  of  27  November  2001  on  the  association  of  the  overseas  countries  and 
territories with the European Community ("Overseas Association Decision") (OJ L 314, 30.11.2001, p. 1). 

7 

 

EAC/S16/2013 

registering  the  organisations  in  the  Education,  Audiovisual,  Culture,  Citizenship  and  Volunteering 
Participant Portal3. 
 
The Participant Portal  allows applicants  (the project leader and  the partners) to upload or update the 
information related to their legal status and attach the requested legal and financial documents.  
 
See section 13.2 on Registration in the Participant Portal for more information. 
 
5.4  Eligible projects  
 
Depending on the scale, needs, nature, objectives and priorities of the project, the applicants will have 
to choose to apply under either category 1 - Smaller scale cooperation projects or category 2 - Larger 
scale cooperation projects. 
 
Please note that the project leader can apply only once a year under either category 1 or category 2. 

 

Category 1 - Smaller scale cooperation projects 

 
This category includes projects that:  
 

- 

- 

shall involve a project leader and at least two other partners having their legal seat in at least 
three different countries taking part in the Creative Europe – Culture Sub-programme. Either 
the project leader or one of the partners must have its legal seat in one of the countries referred 
to in paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of section 5.2.; 
are  the  subject  of  an  application  requesting  a  EU  grant  of  no  more  than  EUR  200  000 
representing maximum 60% of the total eligible budget. 
 

Category 2 - Larger scale cooperation projects  

 

This category includes projects that: 
 

- 

- 

shall involve a project leader and at least five other partners having their legal seat in at least 
six different countries taking part in the Creative Europe – Culture Sub-programme. Either the 
project leader or one of the partners must have its legal seat in one of the countries referred to 
in paragraphs 1,3 and 4 of section 5.2.; 
are  the  subject  of  an  application  requesting  a  EU  grant  of  no  more  than  EUR  2  000  000 
representing maximum 50% of the total eligible budget. 

 
In  case  of  selection,  the  project  leader  of  a  larger  scale  cooperation  project  will  not  be  eligible  to 
submit  other  applications  under  the  cooperation  projects  scheme  as  long  as  the  project  is  on-going. 
This  means  that  a  project  leader  of  an  on-going  category  2  project  is  not  eligible  to  be  the  project 
leader of another cooperation project, irrespective of the category, unless the eligibility period of the 
selected cooperation project is over when the eligibility period of the other project begins. 
 
For  both  categories  of  cooperation  projects,  the  project  must  be  based  on  a  cooperation  agreement 
concluded between the project leader and the partners. The cooperation  agreement  must state all the 
legal  and  financial  conditions  of  cooperation  between  the  partners  as  well  as  their  operational 
responsibilities in the implementation of the project. 

                                                        
3  The  organisation  has  to  register  in  the  Unique  Registration  Facility  (URF)  hosted  in  the  Education, 
Audiovisual, Culture, Citizenship and Volunteering Participant Portal. The Unique Registration Facility is a tool 
shared by other services of the European Commission. If your organisation already has a PIC that has been used 
for  other  programmes  (for  example  the  Research  programmes),  the  same  PIC  is  valid  for  the  present  call  for 
proposals. 

8 

 

EAC/S16/2013 

(2014-2020)  and 

5.5  Eligible activities  
 
Eligible  activities  to  be  taken  into  consideration  are  the  activities  which  intend  to  achieve  the 
objectives and priorities set in section 2 of these guidelines. 
 
The activities must relate to the cultural and creative sectors as defined in Article 2 of Regulation  N° 
1295/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  establishing  the  Creative  Europe 
Programme 
repealing  Decisions  Nos  1718/2006/EC,  1855/2006/EC  and 
1041/2009/EC.  Activities  dedicated  exclusively  to  the  audiovisual  sectors  are  not  eligible  under  the 
Culture Sub-programme. However, audiovisual activities may be eligible as long as they are ancillary 
to activities dedicated to the non-audiovisual cultural and creative sectors.  
 
5.6  Eligible period  
 
Activities  must  start  between  June  of  year  n  and  December  of  year  n  for  larger  scale  cooperation 
projects and between May and December of year n for smaller scale cooperation projects. For the first 
call for proposals only, the start date of the activities must lie between October and December 2014 for 
larger  scale  cooperation  projects  and  between  September  and  December  2014  for  smaller  scale 
cooperation projects. 

However, a EU grant may be awarded for a project, which has already begun only if the applicant can 
demonstrate  the  need  to  start  the  project  before  the  agreement  has  been  signed.  In  any  case,  the 
Agency will have to approve the justification of the need to start the project before the agreement has 
been signed and  the project cannot start before the deadline for submission indicated in section 3 of 
these guidelines.  

No grant may be awarded retroactively for projects already completed. 

For  both  smaller  and  larger  scale  cooperation  projects  the  maximum  duration  of  a  project  is  48 
months. 

Applications  for  projects  scheduled  to  run  for  a  longer  period  than  that  specified  in  these  guidelines 
will not be considered as eligible. 

No extension to the eligibility period beyond the maximum duration will be granted. 

However, if after the signing of the agreement and after the start of the project it becomes impossible 
for  the  beneficiary,  for  fully  justified  reasons  beyond  his  control,  to  complete  the  project  within  the 
scheduled  period,  an  exceptional  extension  to  the  eligibility  period  may  be  granted.  A  maximum 
extension  of  12  additional  months  may  be  granted,  if  requested  before  the  deadline  specified  in  the 
agreement. The maximum duration will then be 60 months. 
 
6.  EXCLUSION CRITERIA 
 
6.1 Exclusion from participation 
 
Applicants  (the  project  leader  and  the  partners)  will  be  excluded  from  participating  in  the  call  for 
proposals procedures if they are in any of the following situations: 
 
(a)  

they are bankrupt or being wound up, are having their affairs administered by the courts, have 
entered into an arrangement with creditors, have suspended business activities, are the subject 
of  proceedings  concerning  those  matters,  or  are  in  any  analogous  situation  arising  from  a 
similar procedure provided for in national legislation or regulations; 
they or persons having powers of representation, decision making or control over them have 
been  convicted  of  an  offence  concerning  their  professional  conduct  by  a  judgment  of  a 
competent authority of a Member State which has the force of res judicata; 

(b)  

 

9 

EAC/S16/2013 

(c)  

(d)  

(e)  

(f)  

they  have  been  guilty  of  grave  professional  misconduct  proven  by  any  means  which  the 
responsible authorising officer can justify including by decisions of the EIB and international 
organisations; 
they  are  not  in  compliance  with  their  obligations  relating  to  the  payment  of  social  security 
contributions or the payment of taxes in accordance with the legal provisions of the country in 
which they are established or with those of the country of  the responsible authorising officer 
or those of the country where the agreement is to be performed; 
they or persons having powers of representation, decision making or control over them have 
been  the  subject  of  a  judgment  which  has  the  force  of  res  judicata  for  fraud,  corruption, 
involvement in a criminal organisation, money laundering or any other illegal activity, where 
such illegal activity is detrimental to the EU's financial interests; 
they  are  subject  to  an  administrative  penalty  referred  to  in  Article  109(1)  of  the  Regulation 
(EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 of the European Parliament and the Council of October 2012 on 
the  financial  rules  applicable  to  the  general  budget  of  the  Union4  (hereinafter  "the  Financial 
Regulation"). 

 
6.2 Exclusion from award 
 
Applicants will not be granted financial support if, in the course of the grant award procedure, they: 
 
(a)  
(b)  

are subject to a conflict of interests; 
are  guilty  of  misrepresentation  in  supplying  the  information  required  by  the  Agency  as  a 
condition of participation in the grant award procedure or fail to supply this information; 
find themselves in one of the situations of exclusion, referred to in section 6.1 above. 

(c)  
 
In accordance with Article 109 of the Financial Regulation, administrative and financial penalties may 
be imposed on applicants who are guilty of misrepresentation or are found to have seriously failed to 
meet their contractual obligations under a previous grant award procedure. 
 
6.3  Supporting documents 
 
Applicants for a grant exceeding EUR 60 000 must sign a declaration on their honour certifying that 
they are not in any of the situations referred to above and in Articles 106(1) and 107 of the Financial 
Regulation.  
 
The signed declaration on honour must be attached to the application form.  
 
7. 

SELECTION CRITERIA 

 
Applicants  must  have  stable  and  sufficient  sources  of  funding  (financial  capacity)  to  maintain  their 
activity  throughout  the  period  during  which  the  project  is  being  carried  out  and  to  participate  in  its 
funding. Applicant organisations must have the professional competencies and qualifications required 
to complete the proposed project (operational capacity). 

Applicants must submit a declaration on their honour, completed and signed, attesting to their status as 
a legal person and to their financial and operational capacity to complete the proposed activities. 

In  addition  to  the  declaration  on  honour,  applicant  organisations  applying  for  a  grant  above  
EUR 60 000 must submit together with their applications, the following documents: 
 

                                                        
4 OJ L 298, 26.10.2012, p.1 

 

10 

EAC/S16/2013 

7.1 Operational capacity  
 

- 

copies of the applicant organisations' (project leader and partners)  activity reports of the last 
two years. Applicants who have issued only one activity report on the date of submission due 
to their date of establishment shall be authorised to provide this report only. 

 
The  Agency  will  assess  and  verify  the  level  of  subcontracting  activities  used  by  applicants  to 
implement the proposed project. 
 
7.2 Financial capacity  
 

- 
- 

the financial capacity form for the project leader; 
the financial statements of the project leader (including the balance sheet, the profit and loss 
accounts and annexes) for the last two financial years for which the accounts have been 
closed. Applicants who have closed only one financial year on the date of submission shall be 
authorised to provide financial statements for this year only. 
 

If, on the basis of the documents submitted, the Agency considers that financial capacity has not been 
proved or is not satisfactory, it may:  

- 

- 

require  a  guarantee  (see  section  9.2  of  these  guidelines)  provided  by  an  approved  bank,  a 
financial institution, a joint gurantee by a third party or the beneficiaries of the project; 
offer a grant agreement without pre-financing and make (an) interim payment(s) on the basis 
of eligible expenses already incurred when the project has been partly carried out. 

 
The  Agency  reserves  the  rights  to  reject  the  application  if  neither  of  these  two  options  can  be 
implemented, irrespective of the reason. 

 

The verification of financial capacity shall not apply to public bodies or to international organisations.  
 
7.3 Audit report 
 
For applications for a project requesting a EU grant over EUR 750 000, the grant applications must be 
accompanied by an external audit report produced by an approved external auditor. 
 
This report shall certify the accounts for the last financial year available.  
 
This obligation does not apply to public bodies and international organisations under public law. This 
obligation  may  not  apply  to  education  and  training  establishments  if  decided  by  the  competent 
authorising officer on the basis of his analysis of management risks. 
 
8.  AWARD CRITERIA  
 
Eligible applications will be assessed on the basis of the following criteria: 
 
Criteria 
1. Relevance 

Maximum points 
35 

Definition 
Does the application contribute 
to the objectives and priorities 
of the scheme?  
How is the project 
implemented? 
What is the project's approach 
to communicating its activities 
and to sharing knowledge and 
experiences with the sector and 

25 

20 

11 

2. Quality of the content and 
activities 
3. Communication and 
dissemination  

 

EAC/S16/2013 

4. Quality of the partnership 

across borders?  
What is the quality of the 
partnership in terms of effective 
implementation and 
sustainability? 

20 

 
1. Relevance (35) 
 
This  criterion  evaluates  how  the  project  will  contribute  to  reinforcing  the  sector's 
professionalization  and  capacity  to  operate  trans-nationally,  to  promoting  transnational 
circulation  of  cultural  and  creative  works  and  mobility  of  artists  and  to  improving  access  to 
cultural and creative works.  
 

  How  relevant  is  the  project  to  one  or  more  of  the  following  priorities  considered  as 

instrumental to the achievement of the objectives of the Sub-programme: 
-  Providing cultural players with skills, competences and know-how, including encouraging 
adaptation to digital technologies, testing innovative approaches to audience development 
and testing new business and management models; 

-  Enabling cultural players to cooperate internationally and to internationalise their careers 

and activities in the EU and beyond; 

-  Strengthening  European  cultural  and  creative  organisations  and  international  networking 

in order to facilitate access to professional opportunities;  

-  Supporting international touring, events, exhibitions and festivals; 
-  Supporting the circulation of European literature; 
-  Supporting audience development as a means of stimulating interest in European cultural 

works. 

  Are  there  other  priorities  identified  in  the  framework  of  the  project  and  how  appropriate  are 

they to achieve the specific objectives of the Sub-programme? 

−  To  what  extent  is  the  project  aiming  at  producing  results  which  will  go  beyond  the  sole 

interest of the partners and direct participants and have potential long-term impacts? 

−  How  complementary  is  the  project  to  cultural  actions  implemented  at  national,  regional  or 

local level? 

 
2. Quality of the content and activities (25) 
 
This criterion evaluates how the project will be implemented in practice (quality of the activities 
and  the  deliverables,  the  experience  of  the  staff  in  charge  of  the  project  and  working 
arrangements). 
 

  Are  there  concrete  and  well  defined  outputs  (deliverables)  and  how  appropriate  are  they 

 

towards the overall objectives of the project?  
Is  a  qualitative  and  quantitative  assessment  of  the  results  foreseen  and  how  clear  and 
appropriate is it? 

  How concrete and well defined are the  activities to be implemented in the framework of the 
project?  How  clearly  related  are  the  objectives  and  activities  of  the  project  to  the  identified 
needs of the target groups? 
If applicable, is there a convincing and clearly defined audience development strategy?5 

 
  How relevant is the experience of the team taking part in the project, for example in terms of 
organisational  skills,  experience  and  track  record  in  the  cultural  and  creative  sectors, 
communication and language skills?  To this purpose, the CVs of the persons responsible for 
the  submitted  project  within  the  applicant  organisation  and  each  partner  institution  will  be 
assessed. 

                                                        
5 For more information on audience development, please refer to Annex 2 to these guidelines. 

12 

 

EAC/S16/2013 

  How  appropriate  is  the  allocation  of  the  budget  and  human  resources  to  the  activities 

undertaken in the framework of the project?  

  How clear and realistic is the time-table for implementing the project activities? 

 
3. Communication and dissemination (20) 
 
This criterion evaluates the project's approach to communicating its activities and results and to 
sharing knowledge and experiences with the sector and across borders. The aim is to maximise 
the  impact  of  the  project  results  by  making  them  available  as  widely  as  possible  at  local, 
regional, national and European levels, so that they have a reach beyond those directly involved 
in the project and an impact beyond the project's lifetime.  
 

  How  clear  and  appropriate  is  the  strategy  to  communicate  on  the  activities  of  the  partners' 
network,  including  the  objectives,  target  groups,  tools6,  channels7,  media,  impact  and 
timeline? 

  How will EU support be made visible throughout the duration of the project and beyond and 

contribute to a positive image of the EU? 

  How  and  to  whom  will  the  experience  and  knowledge  acquired  through  the  project  be 
disseminated at local, regional, national and/or European level, including beyond the duration 
of the project? 

 
4. Quality of the partnership (20) 
 
This  criterion  evaluates  the  extent  to  which  the  general  organisation  and  co-ordination  of  the 
project  will  ensure  the  effective  implementation  of  the  activities  and  will  contribute  to  their 
sustainability. 
 

  How is the partnership defined and to what extent does it ensure a strong involvement of all 

partners and a clear division of tasks between them? 

  How will the partnership be made to last beyond the duration of the project? 
  To  what  extent  does  the  partnership  go  beyond  the  organisations'  direct  geographical 

neighbours and draw partners from a diverse geographical range of participating countries? 

 
9.  FUNDING CONDITIONS 

An EU grant is a direct financial contribution, by way of donation, from the budget in order to finance 
an  action  (also  referred  to  as  "project")  intended  to  help  achieve  an  EU  policy  objective.  Grants  are 
based  on  the  principle  of  co-financing.  The  EU  grant  supplements  the  applicant  organisations’  own 
financial resources, income generated by the action or financial contributions from third parties. 

Acceptance of an application by the Agency does not constitute an undertaking to award an EU grant 
equal  to  the  amount  requested  by  the  beneficiary.  Furthermore,  under  no  circumstances  may  the 
amount awarded exceed the amount requested. 

Applicants applying for larger scale cooperation projects may be asked to amend their programme of 
activities and their forecasted budget accordingly (see section 13.4.2 of these guidelines –adjustment 
phase). 

The award of a grant does not establish an entitlement for subsequent years. 

 

 

                                                        
6  Examples  of  "tools"  are  publications,  promotional  material:  leaflets,  posters,  gadgets,  audio-visual  material, 
newsletters, data bases, etc.  
7  Examples  of  "channels"  include  internet,  social  media  (Facebook,  Twitter,  Youtube),  events:  conferences, 
seminars, workshops, etc. 

13 

 

EAC/S16/2013 

9.1 Contractual provisions and payment procedures 
 
9.1.1 Contractual provisions  
 
In the event a grant is awarded by the Agency, a grant agreement drawn-up in euro and detailing the 
conditions and level of funding will be sent to the project leader, as well as the procedure in view of 
formalising the obligations of the parties.   
 
Two  copies  of  the  original  agreement  must  be  signed  by  the  project  leader  on  behalf  of  all  project 
partners  (the  project  leader  and  the  partners  are  also  referred  to  as  "the  beneficiaries")  and  must  be 
returned to the Agency immediately. The Agency will sign them last.  
 
9.1.2 Payment procedure 
 
If  the  financial  capacity  requirements  are  not  met  the  payment  procedure  will  be  established  as 
indicated in section 7.2 of these guidelines (assessment of the financial capacity). 

If  the  financial  capacity  requirements  are  met  and  depending  on  the  amount  of  the  grant  and  the 
duration of the project, the Agency may decide to transfer one or several pre-financing payments. The 
nature, the number and the amount of payments will be fully specified in the grant agreement.  

Case 1: 
 
For  actions  with  a  maximum  duration  of  24  months  and  when  the  EU  grant  is  less  than  or  equal  to 
EUR 750 000, the Agency will transfer a pre-financing payment of 70% of the grant to the beneficiary. 
The  pre-financing  payment  shall  be  transferred  within  30  days  of  the  date  when  the  last  of  the  two 
parties signs the agreement, provided all necessary guarantees are received.  
 
 

 

 

 

14 

Amount of the Union grant in EUR€ 2.000.000,00€ 1.400.000,00€ 750.000,00€ 200.000,00€ 0,00012243648Number of months 1st  prefinancing of 70%Balance of 30%1st prefinancing of 50% 2nd prefinancing of 30%Balance of 20%1st  prefinancing of 50% Balance of 50%1st prefinancing of 40%                                                           2nd prefinancing of 40%Balance of 20%Case 1Case 2Case 3Case 4EAC/S16/2013 

Case 2: 
 
For  actions  with  a  duration  higher  than  24  months  and  when  the  EU  grant  is  less  than  or  equal  to  
EUR 750 000, the Agency will transfer: 
 

  a  first  pre-financing  payment  of  50%  of  the  EU  grant  to  the  beneficiary.  The  pre-financing 
payment shall be transferred within 30 days of the date when the last of the two parties signs 
the agreement, provided all necessary guarantees are received. 

  a second pre-financing payment of 30% of the EU grant to the beneficiary. The second pre-
financing payment shall be based on a request for payment accompanied by a progress report 
on the project’s implementation sent to the Agency. The second pre-financing payment shall 
be transferred  within 60 days  of the date when  the  Agency approves the report. The second 
pre-financing  payment  may  only  be  made  if  at  least  70%  of  the  previous  pre-financing 
payment has been used up. Where the consumption of the previous pre-financing payment is 
less than 70%, the amount of the new pre-financing payment shall be reduced by the unused 
amounts of the previous pre-financing payment. 

Case 3: 
 
For actions with a maximum duration of 24 months and when the EU grant is more than EUR 750 000 
and less than or equal to EUR 2 000 000, the Agency will transfer a pre-financing payment of 50% of 
the EU grant to the beneficiary. The pre-financing payment shall be transferred within 30 days of the 
date  when  the  last  of  the  two  parties  signs  the  agreement,  provided  all  necessary  guarantees  are 
received.  
 
Case 4: 
 
For actions with a duration higher than 24 months and when the EU grant is more than EUR 750 000 
and less than or equal to EUR 2 000 000, the Agency will transfer: 
  

 

a  first  pre-financing  payment  of  40%  of  the  EU  grant  to  the  beneficiary.  The  pre-financing 
payment shall be transferred within 30 days of the date when the last of the two parties signs 
the agreement, provided all necessary guarantees are received.   
 

  a second pre-financing payment of 40% of the EU grant to the beneficiary. The second pre-
financing payment shall be based on a request for payment accompanied by a progress report 
on the project’s implementation sent to the Agency. The second pre-financing payment shall 
be transferred  within 60 days  of the date when  the  Agency approves the report. The second 
pre-financing  payment  may  only  be  made  when  at  least  70%  of  the  previous  pre-financing 
payment has been used up. Where the consumption of the previous pre-financing payment is 
less than 70%, the amount of the new pre-financing payment shall be reduced by the unused 
amounts of the previous pre-financing payment. 

Pre-financing is intended to provide the beneficiaries with a float. 
 
For  all  projects,  the  Agency  will  establish  the  amount  of  the  final  payment  to  be  made  to  the 
beneficiary on the basis of the final report (see section 9.4.2 of these guidelines). 

9.2  Guarantee 
 
In  the  event  that  the  applicant’s  financial  capacity  is  not  satisfactory,  the  Agency  may  require  any 
organisation which has been awarded a grant exceeding EUR 60 000 to provide a guarantee  in order 
to limit the financial risks linked to the pre-financing payment. 

 

15 

EAC/S16/2013 

The  purpose  of  this  guarantee  is  to  make  a  bank,  a  financial  institution  or  third  party  stand  as 
irrevocable collateral security for, or first-call guarantor of, the grant beneficiary's obligations. 

This  financial  guarantee,  in  euro,  shall  be  provided  by  an  approved  bank  or  financial  institution 
established in one of the EU Member States. When the beneficiary is established in a non EU Member 
State,  the  Agency  may  agree  that  a  bank  or  financial  institution  established  in  that  country  may 
provide the guarantee if it considers that the bank or financial institution offers equivalent security and 
characteristics as those offered by a bank or financial institution established in a Member State. 

The  guarantee  may  be  replaced  by  a  joint  and  several  guarantees  by  a  third  party  or  by  a  joint 
guarantee of the beneficiaries of an action who are parties to the same grant agreement. 

The guarantee shall be released as the pre-financing is gradually cleared against interim payments or 
payments  of  balances    to  the  beneficiary,  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  laid  down  in  the  grant 
agreement. 

This requirement does not apply to: 
 

- 

- 
- 
- 

public  bodies  and  international  organisations  under  public  law  established  by  inter-
governmental agreements,  
specialised agencies created by such organisations,  
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),  
the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.  

 
9.3  Principle of non-cumulative award (Double funding) 

Each action may give rise to the award of only one grant for the same application from the budget of 
the EU. 
 
To ensure this, applicants must give details in their application form of any other grant requests related 
to the same project which they have submitted or intend to submit to the  EU stating in each case the 
budgetary year, the budget heading, the Union Programme and the amount requested. 
 
If a proposed project is found – at any stage of the process prior to the signature by the Agency of the 
grant  agreement  –  to  receive  funding  for  parts  of  the  activities  proposed  from  other  Union 
programmes, the Agency will request modifications to the concerned activities, even by reopening an 
already closed refinement phase, or may reject awarding a grant to the application, notably if changes 
necessary to avoid duplicate funding would entail unequal treatment vis-à-vis unsuccessful applicants. 

9.4 Funding method 
 
9.4.1 Flat-rate grant 
 
Not applicable. 
 
9.4.2 Budget based financing 
 
The system of financing is a budget-based grant (eligible costs).  
 
General provisions 

Budget-based grants are calculated on the basis of a detailed estimated budget. The budget attached to 
the application form must be complete and in balance, i.e. total estimated expenditure must equal total 
revenue, including the grant applied for from the Agency. The budget must indicate clearly the costs 
that are eligible for EU funding.  

The EU grant is limited to a co-financing rate of 60% of eligible costs for  smaller scale  cooperation 
projects. 

 

16 

EAC/S16/2013 

The  EU  grant  is  limited  to  a  co-financing  rate  of  50%  of  eligible  costs  for  larger  scale  cooperation 
projects. 

The budget must be drawn up in  euro. Applicants not based in the euro zone must use the exchange 
rate published in the Official Journal of the EU on the date of publication of the call for proposals in 
the  Official  Journal.  For  the  first  call,  published  on  the  website  of  the  European  Commission  on  10 
December 2013, applicants must use the exchange rate published in the Official Journal of the EU.  

Part of the total estimated  eligible expenses  must be financed from sources other than the  EU grant. 
Applicants must indicate the sources and amounts of any other funding received or applied for in the 
same financial year for the implementation of the action concerned.  

The amount of the own resources indicated in the revenue part of the estimated budget is regarded as 
secured, and this amount, as a minimum, must be entered in the revenue section of the final report. 
 
The allocated amount may not exceed the amount requested. 
 
The EU grant may not have the purpose or effect of producing a profit  for the beneficiaries. Profit is 
defined  as  a  surplus  of  receipts  over  eligible  costs  incurred  by  the  beneficiaries.  Where  a  profit  is 
made, the Agency is entitled to recover a percentage of the profit corresponding to the EU contribution 
to  the  eligible  costs  actually  incurred  by  the  beneficiaries.  This  provision  does  not  apply  to  grants 
lower than or equal to EUR 60 000. 

Eligible costs 
 
To  be  eligible  for  this  call,  costs  must  correspond  to  eligible  activities  as  defined  in  section  5.5  of 
these guidelines.  

Eligible costs of the action are costs actually incurred by the beneficiaries, which meet the following 
criteria: 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 
- 

they are incurred during the duration of the action as specified in the grant agreement, with the 
exception  of  costs  relating  to  the  final  reports  and  the  report  of  factual  findings  of  the  final 
financial report; 
they are indicated in the estimated overall budget of the action; 
they  are  incurred  in  connection  with  the  action  which  is  the  subject  of  the  grant  and  are 
necessary for its implementation; 
they are identifiable and verifiable, in particular being  recorded in the accounting  records of 
the  beneficiaries  and  determined  according  to  the  applicable  accounting  standards  of  the 
country  where  the  beneficiaries  are  established  and  according  to  the  usual  cost-accounting 
practices of the beneficiaries; 
they comply with the requirements of applicable tax and social legislation; 
they  are  reasonable,  justified,  and  comply  with  the  requirements  of  sound  financial 
management, in particular regarding economy and efficiency. 

The beneficiaries' internal accounting and auditing procedures must permit direct reconciliation of the 
costs and revenue declared in respect of the action with the corresponding accounting statements and 
supporting documents. 

Eligible direct costs 

The  eligible  direct  costs  for  the  action  are  those  costs  which,  with  due  regard  for  the  conditions  of 
eligibility set out above, are identifiable as specific costs directly linked to the  implementation of the 
action and which can therefore be booked to it directly. In particular, the following categories of direct 
costs are eligible, provided that they satisfy the criteria set out in the previous paragraph: 

- 

the  cost  of  staff  assigned  to  the  project,  comprising  actual  salaries  plus  social  security 
contributions and other statutory costs included in their remuneration, provided that this cost 
does  not  exceed  the  usual  remuneration  policy  of the  project  leader  or,  where  applicable,  its 
partners.  

 

17 

EAC/S16/2013 

NB:  staff  costs  must  be  actual  cost  incurred  by  the  beneficiaries.  Staff  costs  of  other 
organisations  are  eligible  only  if  they  are  paid  directly  or  reimbursed  by  the  beneficiaries. 
Staff costs must be in line with the activities and proportionate to the budget. 
The  corresponding  salary  costs  of  personnel  of  national  administrations  are  eligible  to  the 
extent  that  they  relate  to  the  cost  of  activities  which  the  relevant  public  authority  would  not 
carry out if the project concerned was not undertaken; 
costs of travel and related subsistence allowances, provided that these costs are in line with the 
beneficiaries'  usual  practices  and  do  not  exceed  the  scales  approved  annually  by  the 
Commission; 
depreciation  cost  of  equipment  (new  or  second-hand),  provided  that  it  is  written  off  in 
accordance  with  the  tax  and  accounting  rules  applicable  to  the  beneficiaries  and  generally 
accepted  for  items  of  the  same  kind.  Only  the  portion  of  the  equipment's  depreciation 
corresponding to the duration of the project and the rate of actual use for the purposes of the 
project may be taken into account by the Agency, except where the nature and/or the context 
of its use justifies different treatment by the Agency; 
costs  of  consumables  and  supplies,  provided  that  they  are  identifiable  and  assigned  to  the  
project; 
costs entailed by other contracts awarded by the beneficiaries for the purposes of carrying out 
the  project, provided that the conditions laid down in the grant agreement are met; 
costs  arising  directly  from  requirements  linked  to  the  performance  of  the  project 
(dissemination  of  information,  specific  evaluation  of  the  project,  translations,  reproduction, 
etc.); 
costs  relating  to  a  pre-financing  guarantee  lodged  by  the  beneficiaries  of  the  grant  where 
required; 
costs relating to external audits where required in support of requests for payment; 
non-deductible value added tax (VAT) for all activities which are not activities of the public 
authorities in the Member States. 
 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

For  actions  involving  costs  relating  to  a  third  country  (i.e.  costs  relating  to  natural  persons  who  are 
citizens of a third country, organisations based in a third country and activities taking place in a third 
country), the relevant costs incurred by the project leader and/or the partners must not exceed 30% of 
the total eligible budget. 

Eligible indirect costs (overheads)  

A  flat-rate  amount,  not  exceeding  7%  of  the  eligible  direct  costs  of  the  project,  is  eligible  under 
indirect  costs,  representing  the  beneficiaries'  general  administrative  costs  which  can  be  regarded  as 
chargeable to the project. 

Indirect costs may not include costs entered under another budget heading. 

These costs encompass the following categories: 

- 
- 

premises and related expenses (e.g. rent, insurance, …); 
office expenses and consumables (e.g. telephone, postal services, photocopies, …). 

In  case  the  applicant  organisation  receives  an  operating  grant  under  the  budget  of  the  EU,  indirect 
costs are not eligible under specific actions. 

Ineligible costs 

The following costs shall not be considered eligible: 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

return on capital; 
debt and debt service charges; 
provisions for losses or debts; 
interest owed; 
doubtful debts; 
exchange losses; 

 

18 

EAC/S16/2013 

- 
- 

- 
- 
- 

costs of transfers from the Agency charged by the bank of a beneficiary; 
costs  declared  by  a  beneficiary  in  the  framework  of  another  action  receiving  a  EU  grant.  In 
particular,  indirect  costs  shall  not  be  eligible  under  a  grant  for  a  project  awarded  to  a 
beneficiary who already receives an operating grant financed from the  EU budget during the 
period in question; 
excessive or reckless expenditure; 
contributions in kind;   
deductible VAT.  

Calculation of the final grant amount and supporting documents 

The Agency will determine the final amount of the grant on the basis of following documents: 
 

- 

- 

a  final  report  on  the  implementation  and  results  of  the  project  (“final  technical  report”) 
and related documentation including a public summary/report as foreseen in section 11.2 
of these guidelines; 
a  final  financial  report  of  costs  actually  incurred  ("final  financial  report")  which  must 
include a consolidated statement as well as a breakdown of the amounts claimed by each 
beneficiary. 
 

Additionally,  

 

if the EU grant is more than EUR 60 000 and lower than EUR 750 000 

The beneficiary is required to submit, in support of the final payment, a “report of factual findings on 
the final financial report - type I” produced by an approved auditor or in case of public bodies,  by a 
competent and independent public officer. 

The procedure and the format to be followed by the approved auditor or in case of public bodies, by 
the  competent  and  independent  public  officer,  are  detailed  in  the  following  “guidance  notes": 
http://eacea.ec.europa.eu/about/documents/guidance-notes-audit-type-i_11.2012_en.pdf 

The use of the report format set by the “guidance notes” is compulsory. 

 

if the EU grant is of EUR  750 000 or more and when the cumulative amount of  the 
request for payment is at least EUR 325 000  

The beneficiary is required to submit, in support of the final payment, a “report of factual findings on 
the final financial report - type II” produced by an approved auditor or in case of public bodies, by a 
competent and independent public officer.  

The procedure and the format to be followed by an approved auditor or in case of public bodies, by the 
competent  and  independent  public  officer,  are  detailed  in  the  following  “guidance  notes”: 
http://eacea.ec.europa.eu/about/documents/guidance-notes-audit-type-ii_11.2012_en.pdf 

The use of the report format set by the “guidance notes” is compulsory. 

 

if the EU grant is below or equal to EUR 60 000 

The  beneficiary  is  required  to  submit,  in  support  of  the  final  payment,  a  copy  of  the  following 
underlying documents: 

-  Staff costs: the three highest consolidated staff costs for the whole eligibility period.   
-  The three highest value subcontracts. 
- 

25% of the highest costs declared under travel and subsistence. 

 
If it results from the calculation of the final amount of the grant that the eligible costs actually incurred 
by the beneficiaries are lower than anticipated, the Agency will apply the rate of co-financing stated in 
the grant agreement to the expenditure actually incurred. The Agency also reserves the right to reduce 
the amount of the grant if the beneficiaries have not fully implemented the agreed action (as set out in 
the grant agreement). 

 

19 

EAC/S16/2013 

In  the  event  of  non-execution  or  clearly  inadequate  execution  of  activities  planned  in  the  work 
programme  attached  to  the  grant  agreement  or  in  the  event  the  information  requested  in  the  grant 
agreement is not submitted, the final grant will be reduced accordingly.  

Where  applicable,  the  beneficiaries  will  be  required  to  reimburse  any  excess  amounts  paid  by  the 
Agency in the form of pre-financing.  
 

10.  SUB-CONTRACTING AND AWARDING PROCUREMENT CONTRACT 
 
Where  implementation  of  the  action  requires  the  procurement  of  goods,  works  or  services 
(implementation  contracts),  the  beneficiaries  must  obtain  competitive  tenders  from  potential 
contractors and award the contract to the bid offering best value for money, or, as appropriate to the 
tender  offering  the  lowest  price,  taking  care  to  avoid  conflicts  of  interest  and  to  retain  the 
documentation in the event of an audit. 

Sub-contracting is the externalisation to a third party of specific tasks or activities which form part of 
the  action,  as  described  in  the  application.  Sub-contracting  must  satisfy  the  conditions  applicable  to 
any implementation contract (as specified above) and the following additional conditions: 

- 
- 

- 

- 

it may only cover the implementation of a limited part of the action; 
it  must  be  justified  having  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  action  and  what  is  necessary  for  its 
implementation; 
it must be clearly stated in the proposal or prior written authorisation from the Agency must be 
obtained; 
the estimated costs must be clearly identifiable in the estimated budget.  

Sub-contracting  shall  concern  only  supporting  activities.  The  beneficiaries  remain  legally  and 
financially  responsible  for  the  action.  The  beneficiaries  remain  liable  for  the  conception  and  the 
development of the action, the attainment of its objectives, the implementation of the activities and the 
use of appropriate tools.  
 
Please  note  that  the  Agency  will  assess  and  verify  the  level  of  sub-contracting  activities  used  by 
applicants  in  particular  while  assessing  the  operational  capacity  of  the  applicant/beneficiaries  to 
implement its action. 
 
In  the  event  of  sub-contracting  exceeding  EUR  60  000,  the  beneficiaries  must  clearly  document  the 
tendering procedure, submit a copy of the relevant documents together with the final report at the end 
of the action and retain the documentation in the event of an audit. 
 
Costs are based on a verifiable estimate or on the basis of an offer.  

 
11.  PUBLICITY, COMMUNICATION AND DISSEMINATION 
 
11.1 Publicity 
 
All grants awarded in the course of a financial year must be published on the Internet site of the  EU 
institutions no later than the 30th of June of the year following the financial year for which the grants 
were awarded.  The information may also be published using any other appropriate medium, including 
the Official Journal of the EU. 
 
The  beneficiary  authorises  the  Agency  and/or  the  European  Commission  to  publish  the  following 
information in any form and medium, including via the Internet: 

- 
- 
- 

the beneficiary's name and locality, 
the amount awarded and rate of funding, 
the nature and purpose of the grant. 

 

 

20 

EAC/S16/2013 

Upon  a  reasoned  and  duly  substantiated  request  by  the  beneficiary,  the  Agency  may  agree  to  forgo 
such  publicity,  if  disclosure  risks  threatening  the  rights  and  freedoms  of  individuals  concerned  as 
protected  by  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  EU  or  harm  the  commercial  interests  of  the 
recipients. 

 

Beneficiaries must clearly acknowledge the Union’s contribution in all publications or in conjunction 
with activities for which the grant is used. Furthermore, beneficiaries are required to give prominence 
to the name and logo of the Creative Europe Programme on all their publications, posters, programmes 
and other products realised under the co-financed action.  
 
Please  note  that  if  these  requirements  are  not  fully  complied  with,  the  beneficiary’s  grant  may  be 
reduced in accordance with the provisions of the grant agreement. 
 
11.2 Communication and dissemination 
 
To  maximise  impact,  projects  should  have  a  clear  and  strong  strategy  for  communication  and 
dissemination of their activities and results, and applicants must provide enough time and resources to 
communicate and interact appropriately with peers, audiences and local communities as appropriate. 
 
Beneficiaries will be required as stipulated in the grant agreement to produce a public summary/report 
in  English  providing  information  about  their  work  and  the  results  of  their  project.  The  public 
summary/report must be included in the final report submitted to the Agency. The report may be used 
by the Commission to provide information on the results of projects.  
 
The European Commission together with the Agency may identify good practices and prepare relevant 
dissemination materials to be shared within and across all participating countries and beyond.  
 
Data and results from projects will be made freely available to be used by stakeholders, policy makers 
and others in a wide range of ways. 
 
Beneficiaries  may  be  required  to  attend  and  to  participate  in  events  organised  by  the  European 
Commission or the Agency to share their experience with other participants and/or policy makers. 
 
Please  note  that  if  these  requirements  are  not  fully  complied  with,  the  beneficiaries’  grant  will  be 
reduced in accordance with the provisions of the grant agreement. 
 
 
12.  DATA PROTECTION  
 
All  personal  data  (such  as  names,  addresses,  CVs,  etc.)  will  be  processed  in  accordance  with 
Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on 
the  protection  of  individuals  with  regard  to  the  processing  of  personal  data  by  the  Community 
institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data.8  
 
Unless  marked  as  optional,  the  applicant's  replies  to  the  questions  in  the  application  form  are 
necessary to evaluate and further process the grant application in accordance with the specifications of 
the  call  for  proposals.  Personal  data  will  be  processed  solely  for  that  purpose  by  the  department  or 
Unit responsible for the Union grant programme concerned (entity acting as Data Controller). Personal 
data  may  be  transferred  on  a  need  to  know  basis  to  third  parties  involved  in  the  evaluation  of 
applications  or  in  the  grant  management  procedure,  without  prejudice  of  transfer  to  the  bodies  in 
charge of monitoring and inspection tasks in accordance with EU law.  
 

                                                        
8  Official Journal L 8, 12.1.2001. 

 

21 

EAC/S16/2013 

The  applicant  has  the  right  of  access  to,  and  to  rectify,  the  data  concerning  him  or  her.  For  any 
question  relating  to  these  data,  please  contact  the  Data  Controller.  Applicants  have  the  right  of 
recourse  to  the  European  Data  Protection  Supervisor  at  any  time.  A  detailed  Privacy  statement, 
including contact information, is available on the Agency's website: 
http://eacea.ec.europa.eu/about/documents/calls_gen_conditions/eacea_grants_privacy_statement.pdf  
 

Applicants and, if they are legal entities, persons who have powers of representation, decision-making 
or control over them, are informed that, should they be in one of the situations mentioned in:  

- 

- 

the Commission Decision  of 16.12.2008 on the Early Warning System (EWS) for the use of 
authorising officers of the Commission and the executive agencies (OJ, L 344, 20.12.2008, p. 
125), or 
the  Commission  Regulation  of  17.12.2008  on  the  Central  Exclusion  Database  –  CED  (OJ  L 
344, 20.12.2008, p. 12),  

their  personal  details  (name,  given  name  if  natural  person,  address,  legal  form  and  name  and  given 
name of the persons with powers of representation, decision-making or control, if legal person) may 
be  registered  in  the  EWS  only  or both in  the  EWS  and  CED,  and  communicated  to  the  persons  and 
entities  listed  in  the  above-mentioned  Decision  and  Regulation,  in  relation  to  the  award  or  the 
execution of a procurement contract or a grant agreement or decision. 

 
13.  PROCEDURE FOR SELECTION OF APPLICATIONS 
 
13.1  Publication 

 

For the year 2014, calls are published on the website of the European Commission. 
 
As from 2015 and following the adoption of the annual Work Programme(s), calls for proposals will 
be published in the Official Journal of the EU and on the Internet site of the Agency. 
 
13.2 Registration in the Participant Portal 
 
Before  submitting  an  electronic  application,  applicants  will  have  to  register  their  organisation  in  the 
Education,  Audiovisual,  Culture,  Citizenship  and  Volunteering  Participant  Portal  and  receive  a 
Participant Identification Code (PIC). The PIC will be requested in the application form.  
 
The  Participant  Portal  is  the  tool  through  which  all  legal  and  financial  information  related  to 
organisations  will  be  managed.  Information  on  how  to  register  can  be  found  in  the  portal  under  the 
following address: http://ec.europa.eu/education/participants/portal. 
 
The  tool  also  allows  applicants  to  upload  different  documents  related  to  their  organisation.  These 
documents have to be uploaded once and will not be requested  again for subsequent applications by 
the same organisation.  

Details on the supporting documents that need to be uploaded in the Portal can be found in Annex 3. 

 
13.3  Submission of grant applications 
  
Applications must be made through an online application system. Grant applications must be drawn up 
in one of the official EU languages, using the online form specifically designed for this purpose.  
 
The online forms can be obtained at: https://eacea.ec.europa.eu/PPMT/  
 

 

22 

EAC/S16/2013 

Applications must be submitted by the deadline mentioned in the call for proposals, and this 
before  12:00  CET/CEST  (Midday,  Brussels  time),  using  the  online  application  form 
referred to above. 
 
No other method of submission of an application will be accepted. Applications submitted in any other 
way will be automatically rejected. No exceptions will be made.  
 
Applicants should ensure that they have officially submitted their electronic application form and that 
they have received an e-mail acknowledging receipt of their submission.  
 
The application package must be sent: 
 

−  by  post  (the  postmark  serves  as  proof),  by  express  courier  service  (the  registered  delivery 

receipt of the mail service serves as proof),  

or  

−  delivered in person, by applicants themselves, not later than 16.00 on the set deadline. In the 
latter case, a receipt must be obtained as proof of submission, signed and dated by the official 
in the central mail department who took delivery. This department is open from 08.00 to 17.00 
from  Monday  to  Thursday  and  from  08.00  to  16.00  on  Friday;  it  is  closed  on  Saturdays, 
Sundays and Commission holidays9. For security reasons no applications are accepted at the 
premises of the Agency. 

 
The application package to be sent to the Agency must include a CD-Rom or USB stick containing all 
requested documents and mandatory annexes (please see Annex 3). The ones that cannot be provided 
on CD-Rom or USB stick (for example copies of the activity reports, etc.) must be sent on paper.  
 
Application packages are not returned at the end of the evaluation procedure.  
 
No changes to the dossier can be made after the deadline for the submission of applications. However, 
if there is a need to clarify certain aspects, the Agency may contact the applicant for this purpose.  
 
Address to which the application package must be sent (or delivered in person):  
 
Education, Audiovisual & Culture Executive Agency  
Creative Europe Programme (2014–2020)  
Culture Sub-programme – Cooperation projects category 1 or category 2 
Avenue du Bourget 1  
(BOUR 04/02)  
B – 1049 Brussels  
Belgium 
  
13.4 Evaluation procedure 
 
13.4.1  First  step  of  the  evaluation  procedure:  evaluation  of  the  eligibility,  exclusion  and  selection 
criteria  
 
Only  applications  that  fulfil  the  eligibility,  exclusion  and  selection  criteria  will  be  considered  for  a 
grant and will be assessed by experts against the award criteria. If an application is deemed ineligible, 
a letter indicating the reasons will be sent to the applicant. 
 

                                                        
9 1 January (New Year's Day), 2 January (day after New Year's Day), Easter Monday, 1 May (Labour Day), 9 
May (Europe Day), Ascension Day, Whit Monday, 21 July (Belgian National Holiday), 15 August (Assumption 
Day), 1 November (All Saints' Day), 24 December (p.m.  – Christmas Eve), 25 December (Christmas Day), 31 
December (New Year's Eve). 

23 

 

EAC/S16/2013 

Applications  which  do  not  fulfil  the  eligibility,  exclusion  and  selection  criteria  will  be  informed  in 
writing. 
 
Applications that fulfil the eligibility, exclusion and selection criteria  will be ranked according to the 
scores  obtained  in  the  different  award  criteria  (defined  in  section  8  of  these  guidelines).  Within  the 
limit of the available budget, applications obtaining the highest scores will be selected.  
 
The  assessment  will  be  made  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  documents  sent  by  the  relevant  deadline. 
Nevertheless, the Agency reserves the right to request additional information from the applicant.  
 
13.4.2 Second step of the of the evaluation procedure: evaluation of award criteria  
 
This part of the evaluation will be carried out by experts that will be appointed by the Agency further 
to a call for expression of interest. The conditions to be appointed as expert and the procedure of the 
call for expression of interest are published on the website of the Agency at: 
http://eacea.ec.europa.eu/about/call_experts/call_experts_2013_en.php. 
 
a)  Individual evaluation 
 
At this stage the experts are acting individually; they do not discuss the  application with each other, 
nor  with  any  third  party.  The  experts  record  their  individual  opinions  in  a  report,  giving  scores  and 
also comments against the award criteria as defined in section 8 of these guidelines. 
 
Signature of the report also entails a declaration that the expert has no conflict of interest in evaluating 
that particular application. 
 
b)  First consensus meetings  
 
Once all the experts to whom the same  proposal has been assigned have completed their reports, the 
evaluation progresses to a consensus assessment, representing their common views.  
 
The consensus discussion is moderated by a representative of the Agency and/or the Commission.  
 
For smaller scale cooperation projects (category 1), the signing by the experts of the consensus report 
completes the consensus step. Signature of the report also entails a declaration that the experts have no 
conflict of interest in evaluating that particular application. 
 
c)  Second consensus meeting 

 

For  larger  scale  cooperation  projects  (category  2),  an  additional  consensus  meeting  is  organised  to 
allow    the  experts  to  take  an  overall  view  of  the  applications  with  a  view  to  optimising  the  balance 
across sectors, without however compromising on the quality of the applications. 
 
The  second  consensus  discussion  is  moderated  by  a  representative  of  the  Agency  and/or  the 
Commission.  
 
For larger scale cooperation projects (category 2), the signing by the experts of the second consensus 
meeting report completes the consensus step. Signature of the report also entails a declaration that the 
experts have no conflict of interest in evaluating that particular application. 
 
d)  Adjustment phase 

 

Larger scale cooperation projects (category 2) might be invited to start an adjustment phase. 

 

24 

EAC/S16/2013 

 
The  authorising  officer  responsible  may  invite  an  applicant  to  adjust  its  proposal  in  the  light  of  the 
recommendations  of  the  evaluation  committee.  The  authorising  officer  responsible  shall  keep 
appropriate records of contacts with applicants during the procedure.  
 
The  overall  purpose  of  the  adjustment  process  is  to  agree  on  the  technical  details  of  the  project,  to 
collect  financial  and  legal  information  needed  for  preparing  a  grant  agreement  as  well  as  for  the 
project management and reporting on the project execution.  
 
The outcome of the adjustment phase shall not result in changing the substance of the  application to 
the  extent  that  it  would  alter  the  result  of  the  evaluation  and  thus  entail  unequal  treatment  vis-à-vis 
unsuccessful applicants. 
 
13.5  Award decision 
 
The  reports  of  the  experts  and  their  opinions  will  be  assessed  by  an  Evaluation  Committee.  The 
Evaluation Committee, which is composed of staff from the Commission and the Agency, will make a 
proposal for the selection to the authorising officer. The authorising officer (from the Agency or from 
the Commission) remains solely in charge of awarding the grants.  
 
The evaluation procedure will be finalised only after the completion of the above mentioned procedure 
and the adoption by the authorising officer of the grant award decision. 
 
All applicants will be sent a letter formally informing them of the decision taken by the Agency or the 
Commission (award decision), as well as of the assessment of the independent experts for each award 
criterion. 
 
A  list  of  the  selected  applications  will  then  be  published  on  the  Agency's  and  the  Commission's 
websites/dissemination tool. 
 
Once the award decision is adopted, all the technical, legal and financial issues are verified and agreed 
upon and a grant agreement is drafted and sent to the selected applicants for signature. 
 
13.6 Rules applicable 
 
Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 
2012 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union (OJ L 298, 26.10.2012, p.1). 
 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1268/2012 of 29 October 2012 on the rules of application 
of Regulation (EU) No 966/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 
on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union (OJ L 362, 31.12.2012, p.1). 
 
Regulation (EU) No 1295/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2013 
establishing  the  Creative  Europe  Programme  (2014  to  2020)  concerning  the  implementation  of  a 
support Programme for the European creative sector (Creative Europe). 
 
13.7 Contacts 
 
For any further information please contact your Creative Europe desk: 
http://ec.europa.eu/culture/creative-europe/creative-europe-desks_en.htm 
 
Contact within the Agency: 
EACEA-CREATIVE-EUROPE-COOPERATIONPROJECTS@ec.europa.eu 
 
 

 

 

25 

EAC/S16/2013 

ANNEX 1 - GLOSSARY 

Definitions applicable to all measures (as per financial regulation): 

 
Call for proposals: This is one of the means of implementing EU programmes. A call for proposals is 
published annually and specifies a number of elements: the objectives pursued and the annual budget 
allocated  to  the  type  of  support  action  concerned,  the  eligibility,  exclusion,  selection  and  award 
criteria, as well as the relevant supporting documents to be submitted, conditions for obtaining funding 
from  the  EU,  conditions  for  the  submission  of  proposals,  possible  start-up  dates  for  co-financed 
actions and the timetable for the award procedure. Calls for proposals are published on the website of 
the institutions of the EU and in the Official Journal of the EU. The conditions published therein are 
legally  binding.  For  Creative  Europe,  the  present  guidelines  form  the  basis  for  these  calls  for 
proposals.  
 
Conflict  of  interest:  (Art.  57  of  the  Financial  Regulation  applicable  to  the  general  budget  of  the 
Union):  
1.  Financial actors and other persons involved in budget implementation and management, including 
acts  preparatory  thereto,  audit  or  control  shall  not  take  any  action  which  may  bring  their  own 
interests  into  conflict  with  those  of  the  Union.  Where  such  a  risk  exists,  the  person  in  question 
shall  refrain  from  such  action  and  shall  refer  the  matter  to  the  authorising  officer  by  delegation 
who  shall  confirm  in  writing  whether  a  conflict  of  interests  exists.  The  person  in  question shall 
also  inform  his  or  her  hierarchical  superior.  Where  a  conflict  of  interests  is  found  to  exist,  the 
person  in  question  shall  cease  all  activities  in  the  matter.  The  authorising  officer  by  delegation 
shall personally take any further appropriate action.  

2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  1,  a  conflict  of  interests  exists  where  the  impartial  and  objective 
exercise  of  the  functions  of  a  financial  actor  or  other  person,  as  referred  to  in  paragraph  1,  is 
compromised for reasons involving family, emotional life, political or national affinity, economic 
interest or any other shared interest with a recipient.  

3.  The  Commission  shall  be  empowered  to  adopt  delegated  acts  in  accordance  with  Article  210 
setting  out  what  is  likely  to  constitute  a  conflict  of  interests  together  with  the  procedure  to  be 
followed in such cases.   

 
Contribution  in  kind:  A  contribution  in  kind  is  any  non-cash  contribution  to  the  project  by  the 
project leader, the partners or a third party, which can be given a measurable cash value and which is 
not  paid  for  by  the  project  leader  or  any  of  the  partners  (i.e.  costs  which  are  not  recorded  in  their 
accountancy). It may be a contribution in the form of durable capital goods and equipment, putting at 
the disposal of premises, raw materials, unpaid charity work by a private individual or corporate body, 
or  staff  seconded  from  and  remunerated  by  another  organisation  (other  than  the  project  leader  or 
partners). Contributions in kind shall not constitute eligible costs.   
 
Cultural  and  creative  sectors  (Art.  2  of  the  Regulation  establishing  the  Creative  Europe 
Programme):  Cultural  and  creative  sectors  means  all  sectors  whose  activities  are  based  on  cultural 
values and/or artistic and other creative expressions, whether these activities are market or non-market 
oriented and whatever the type of structure that carries them out and irrespective of how it is financed. 
These  activities  include  the  development,  the  creation,  the  production,  the  dissemination  and  the 
preservation  of  goods  and  services  which  embody  cultural,  artistic  or  other  creative  expressions,  as 
well as related functions such as education or management. The cultural and creative sectors include 
inter  alia  architecture,  archives,  libraries  and  museums,  artistic  crafts,  audiovisual  (including  film, 
television,  video  games  and  multimedia),  tangible  and  intangible  cultural  heritage,  design,  festivals, 
music, literature, performing arts, publishing, radio and visual arts.  
 
Eligibility period: The period during which eligible costs can be generated. It is stipulated in the grant 
agreement/decision.  
 

 

26 

EAC/S16/2013 

Public body: Public body means a public sector body or a legal entity governed by private law with a 
public  service  mission  providing  adequate  financial  guarantees.  By  public  sector  body  is  meant  the 
State, the regional or local government  or any organisation governed by public law acting on behalf 
and under the control/responsibility of the State. 
 

Definitions specific to the cooperation projects 

 
Cooperation agreement: The cooperation agreement is a legal document signed by the project leader 
and the partners which  will be annexed  to the grant agreement in  case of selection. The cooperation 
agreement  must  be  legally  valid  in  one  of  the  countries  where  the  project  leader  or  the  partners  are 
established (i.e. a country taking part in the Creative Europe Programme). The cooperation agreement 
must state all the legal and financial conditions of  cooperation between the project leader and all the 
partners as well as their operational responsibilities (and their financial responsibilities when relevant) 
in the implementation of the project.  

There is no template provided by the Agency, however the cooperation agreement could contain the 
following information: 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

a clear description of the objectives of the project;  
a clear description of the activities which will be implemented in order to achieve these 
objectives;  
a clear description of the role and obligations of both the project leader and the partners in 
the design and implementation of the project, including the tasks assigned to each partner; 
a clear description of the budgetary and financial framework including the amounts of 
financial contributions, and pre-financing amounts;  
legal aspects such as duration of agreement, liability, breach of contract, termination of 
agreement, governing law and dispute resolution.  

 
Mandate  letter:  Letter  from  a  partner  organisation  confirming  its  participation  in  a  cooperation 
project  (original  signature  of  the  legal  representative  or  equivalent  required)  and  giving  the  legal 
authority to the project leader for acting on its behalf within the framework of this cooperation project. 
The partner's financial contribution to the project must be indicated in the mandate. The mandate will 
be annexed to the grant agreement in case of selection. 
 
Partners:  The  partners  are  organisations  which  are  active  in  the  cultural  and  creative  sectors  as 
defined  in  article  2  of  the  Regulation  n°  1295/2013  of  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on 
establishing  the  Creative  Europe  Programme  and  are  established  in  countries  taking  part  in  the 
Creative  Europe  Programme.  The  partners  have  a  concrete  and  essential  involvement  in  the  design, 
implementation and financing of the project. Sole delivery of either services or goods with respect to 
the  project,  whether  on  a  contractual  basis  or  not,  is  not  considered  in-line  with  the  definition  of 
partner.  The  partners  which  are  part  of  a  cooperation  project  give  the  legal  authority  to  the  project 
leader to act on their behalf within the framework of the cooperation project. 
 
Project leader: A project leader is an organisation which is active in the cultural and creative sectors 
as defined in article 2 of the Regulation n° 1295/2013 of European Parliament and of the Council on 
establishing the Creative Europe Programme and is established in a country taking part in the Creative 
Europe Programme, who performs a coordinating role during the implementation of the project. This 
role  is  translated  into  an  overall  responsibility  for  carrying  out  the  activities  in  accordance  with  the 
grant  agreement,  as  well  as  a  concrete  and  essential  involvement  in  the  design,  implementation  and 
financing of the project. The project leader will submit the application to the Agency on behalf of all 
partners and acts as the legal co-signatory of the grant agreement. 

 

 

27 

EAC/S16/2013 

 

ANNEX 2 – AUDIENCE DEVELOPMENT 

 
Audience  development  is  an  important  new  priority  in  Creative  Europe  which  helps  European 
artists/cultural  professionals  and  their  works  reach  as  many  people  as  possible  across  Europe  and 
extend  access  to  cultural  works  to  under-represented  groups.  It  also  seeks  to  help  cultural 
organisations  adapt  to  the  need  to  engage  in  new  and  innovative  ways  with  audiences  both  to  retain 
them, to build new audiences, diversify audiences including reaching current "non-audiences", and to 
improve the experience for both existing and future audiences and deepen the relationship with them. 
In  some  cases,  developing  audience  development  skills  and  capacity  may  be  one  of  the  aims  of  the 
project  itself.  In  other  cases,  for  example  projects  involving  co-creations,  co-productions, 
performances  touring  seeking  to  help  artists/cultural  professionals  with  their  careers,  projects  should 
have  a  clear  strategy  for  audience  development  to  accompany  the  project,  so  that  they  do  not  focus 
solely on the "supply" side and to ensure that the activities have the largest possible impact. Similarly, 
projects  with  artists  in  exchange  programmes  and  residences  should  seek  to  interact  with  local 
communities and audiences, rather than confining their mobility experience to their immediate peers. 
The  approach  to  audience  development  will  play  an  important  role  in  assessing  the  quality  of  the 
projects and their contribution to the objectives and priorities of the programme. 
In developing a strategy for audience development, some of the questions which you might consider 
include the following (non-exhaustive): 
 
Why? 
-  What are your motives for working on audience development? 

  Economic necessity 
  An obligation imposed by funders 
  The conviction of the organisation of the importance of this dimension of your work 

What? 
-  What is the aim of your audience development work? 

  To widen your audience (i.e. attract more people with the same profile as the current 

audience)?  

  To  diversify  your  audience  (i.e.  attract  people  with  a  different  profile  from  the 

current audience)? 

  To  deepen  the  relationship  with  your  current  audience  (i.e.  to  create  a  better 
experience  for  your  current  audience,  such  as  helping  them  understand  complex 
work)? 

Who? 
-  Do you know who your existing target groups are? 
-  Which new target groups do you wish to reach and why? 
-  Do you research your audience and non-audience, and if not, why? 

 

How? 
- 
-  How do you intend to develop audiences?  

Is audience development integrated fully into your work? Do you have an explicit strategy? 

  Upstream by involving them in programming, creation or crowd-funding; 
 
  Downstream  through  dialogue  about  the  works  afterwards  (eg  through  physical 

In the process through participatory art; 

meetings with the artists, etc, or through social media, etc) 

  Developing partnerships with other sectors/ other cultural organisations 
  Through volunteering 

 

-  How will you attract your current non-audiences? 
-  Do you have staff members who are assigned specifically to audience development tasks? 
-  Do you have training on audience development for your staff? 

 

28 

EAC/S16/2013 

Is audience development embedded in the management of your organisation? 

- 
Will you evaluate the progress and success of your audience development activities? 
 

 

 

29 

EAC/S16/2013 

ANNEX 3 – MANDATORY DOCUMENTS – CHECK LIST 

Note: Where documents need to be signed, the signature has to be the one of the legal representative 
of the organisation.  
 
Note: For documents with an * mandatory templates are to be found at 
http://ec.europa.eu/culture/creative-europe/calls/call-eac-s16-2013-cooperation_en.htm 
 
Attached to the e-form: 

 Budget form* (Excel) 
 Signed declaration on honour on legal status and operational and financial capacity* 
 Signed declaration on honour concerning exclusion criteria* (only if grant > EUR 60 000) 
 Detailed description of the project 

In the application package: 

 An official cover letter signed by the legal representative of the project leader 
 The mandate letters* signed by the legal representative of each partner and the legal 

representative of the project leader  

 A cooperation agreement signed by the legal representative of each partner and the legal 

representative of the project leader 

 The statutes of the project leader and each of the partners 
 CV's of the persons responsible for the overall coordination and implementation of the 

action on behalf of the project leader and each of the partners  

 The signed budget form* 
 Copies of activity reports of the project leader and partners of the last two years (only if 

grant > EUR 60 000) 

 Signed financial identification form* and the required annexes 
 Financial capacity form* (only if grant > EUR 60 000) 
  Financial  statements  (including  balance  sheet  and  profit  and  loss  accounts)  of  the  project 
leader for the last two financial years for which the accounts have been closed (only if grant 
> EUR 60 000)  

 External  audit  report  produced  by  an  approved  external  auditor,  certifying  the  accounts  of 

the project leader of the last available financial year (only if grant > 750 000) 

Uploaded in the Participant Portal: 

 Signed legal entity form* and the required annexes  

 
 
 
 

 

30 

