GREEN VERSUS GOLD

SOURCES IN CALIFORNIA’S
ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY

Edited by

Carolyn Merchant

Washington, D.C. • Covelo, California

Copyright © 1998 by Island Press

Good-faith efforts have been made to secure permission to reprint the following mate-
rial. If the copyright holder will contact the publisher, any corrections necessary can be
made  to  future  printings.  “A  Historian  Chronicles  the  Return  of  the  Sea  Otter,”  from
Augustin S. Macdonald, Pacific Pelts: Sea Otters Choose California Coast (Oakland, Calif.,
1938); “Yosemite Indians Recount Their Origin Story, Recorded in 1927,” from Elinor
Shane  Smith,  Po-ho-no  and  Other  Yosemite  Legends (Monterey,  Calif.,  1927);  “Samuel
Wood and Alfred E. Heller on California Going, Going. . . , 1962” from California Going,
Going. . . .: Our State’s Struggle to Remain Beautiful and Productive (Sacramento, Calif.:
California Tomorrow, 1962).

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. No
part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission in
writing  from  the  publisher:  Island  Press,  1718  Connecticut  Avenue,  N.W.,  Suite  300,
Washington, DC 20009.

ISLAND PRESS is a trademark of The Center for Resource Economics.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Green versus gold : sources in California’s environmental history /

edited by Carolyn Merchant

p.   cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-55963-579-7. — ISBN 1-55963-580-0
1. California—Environmental conditions—History.  2. Human 

ecology—California—History.  3. Nature—Effect of human beings on—
History.    I. Merchant, Carolyn.
GE155.C2G74   1998
333.7’09794—dc21

98-3346
CIP

Printed on recycled, acid-free paper

Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

60

Indian Lands



Native World Views

Robert F. Heizer 

The Pit River Council proclamation to the president and people of the
United  States  in  June  1970  declared:  “No  amount  of  money  can  buy
Mother Earth; therefore, the California Land Claims Case has no mean-
ing. The Earth is our Mother, and we cannot sell her.” What did the Pit
River Indians mean by this?

The  perception  that  individuals  have  of  who  they  are  in  a  world  of
other men and nature, what their existential and normative values com-
prise and the reasons why these values are important as a basis for behav-
ior are all aspects of what is called “world view.”  . . .

California . . . was  a  region  holding  a  large  number  of  societies  that
had  limited  knowledge,  understanding,  experience,  and  tolerance  of
neighboring peoples. California Indians, while perhaps knowing individ-
uals in neighboring tribelets, for the most part lived out their lives main-
ly within their own limited and familiar territory. . . . Living out the span
of  existence  from  birth  to  death  within  an  area  bounded  by  a  horizon
lying  not  more  than  10  or  15  miles  from  one’s  village  and  not  having
talked to more than 100 different persons in a whole life must have made
one’s world small, familiar, safe, and secure. As if to emphasize or rein-
force this sense of localization, many (perhaps all) tribes put their chil-
dren through a drill of learning the group boundaries:

The boundaries of all tribes . . . are marked with the greatest
precision,  being  defined  by  certain  creeks,  cañon  boulders
conspicuous trees, springs, etc., each of which objects has its
own individual name. It is perilous for an Indian to be found
outside of his tribal boundaries, wherefore it stands him well
in  hand  to  make  himself  acquainted  with  the  same  early  in
life. Accordingly, the squaws teach these things to their chil-

From Robert F. Heizer, “Natural Forces and Native World View,” in R. Heizer, ed.,
Handbook of North American Indians: California (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institu-
tion, 1978), vol. 8, pp. 649–53. Reprinted by permission.

Native World Views

61

dren in a kind of sing-song. . . . Over and over, time and again,
they rehearse all these boulders, etc., describing each minute-
ly and by name, with its surroundings. Then when the chil-
dren are old enough, they take them around . . . and so faith-
ful has been their instruction, that [they] generally recognize
the objects from the descriptions of them previously given by
their mothers. . . .

Indians not only lived close to nature but also felt intimately an inte-
gral  part  of  it.  The  attribution  to  animals  of  higher  intelligence  and
human qualities and emotions was common. In most mythologies it was
animals who occupied the earth before man, and these myth-time beings
lived, felt, and talked like men, created the earth for man, and provided
man with many of the necessities of life (fire, food) as well as some of 
the  undesirable  features  (death). . . . [But]  Natural  phenomena  require
some explanation, and in native California these usually were provided
in  the  form  of  myths.  Thus,  the  phases  of  the  moon,  eclipses,  earth-
quakes, shooting stars, thunder, and the like are all accounted for. If these
explanations  do  not  agree  with  ones  advanced  by  astronomers,  meteo-
rologists,  and  geologists  that  does  not  matter;  as  explanations  they
accounted  satisfactorily  for  what  would  otherwise  have  been  unknown
and dangerous.

The Indians’ relationship to the environment was guided by certain
basic  beliefs. . . . In  each  of  the  numerous  forms  of  plants  and  animals
there existed a soul or spirit, much like that of man’s, so that all three
were thought of as part of the whole of nature. Many tribes believed that
men  after  death  became  transformed  into  animals.  This  idea  may  be
linked with that of the immortality of game animals. When man hunted,
he thanked the spirit of the deer for its assistance. By respecting other
forms of life man did not abuse his relationship to them. Conservation of
resources helped ensure the continued supply of all the things man need-
ed, so that wasteful killing was rarely, if ever, practiced. One took what
he needed and expressed appreciation, rather than acting as though what
was available in the way of food and materials was simply there for the
taking. . . .

All  nature  was  capable  of  willful  acts,  usually  potentially  evil  ones.
The world of mountains, lakes, springs, caves, and forests was viewed as
animate  and  therefore  ever  ready  to  intercede  in  human  affairs. . . . To
mitigate the potential of interference with human plans, ritual was prac-
ticed, even for the most practical and mundane human activities. The

62

Indian Lands

Nomlaki  said,  “Everything  in  this  world  talks,  just  as  we  are  [talking]
now—the trees, rocks, everything. But we cannot understand them, just
as the White people do not understand Indians.”

The Wintu hunter must possess both skill and luck to kill deer. A man
who had lost his hunting luck did not say “I cannot kill deer any more,”
but rather “Deer don’t want to die for me.” The Yurok believed that “a
hunter’s success is brought not by his own cunning, but by the favor he
can win from his game by respectful treatment.” A Pomo hunter before
going out rubbed his body with aromatic angelica and pepper tree leaves,
believing that by so doing he would not be molested by the spirit of the
hills. . . .

The  Indian  concept  of  the  mythical  world  [was]  blended  with  the
actual, physical earth. . . . The small bounded earth known to the Yurok
[was a] land with the Klamath River flowing across it, [at] the edge of the
great saltwater ocean. The rest is mythical, but in the Indian mind as real
as the palpable earth. The Pomo [held] the . . . idea of the earth as float-
ing in an ocean with the sky dome arching over it all like a gigantic bowl,
and something very similar is reported for the Sierra Miwok. And far to
the south among the Luiseno and Ipai-Tipai there are actual cosmologi-
cal maps drawn with the colored earths that portray visible physical fea-
tures of mountains the sea, islands, the moon, sun, and stars with super-
natural and ordinarily invisible spirits. . . .

Eclipses  of  the  sun  or  moon  were  generally  thought  to  be  due  to  a
monster (often a frog or bear) devouring the luminary. In order to fright-
en away the monster people beat sticks on the houses, hit dogs to make
them howl, and shouted their loudest. And, of course, the noise-making
activity was always successful. The Wintu gathered up all the food and
water in the village and threw it out after an eclipse, giving as the reason
that some of the blood from the chewed sun or moon might have spat-
tered on it and thus contaminated it. While nobody could see the blood,
it  might  nevertheless  be  there,  and  the  food-water  disposal  ritual  was
merely  to  play  it  safe.  Throughout  native  California  taboo  and  ritual
served the purpose of controlling or stabilizing an unstable earth, which
was populated both by men and animals as well as supernatural spirits.
The earth-firming or world-renewal ritual was practiced as a formal cult
in northwestern California basic to the Kuksu cult of north-central Cal-
ifornia. Native ritual in pre-White California was a continual check on
and affirmation of the mechanism of natural forces.

Earthquakes were usually thought to be caused by a giant, at times the
Creator  who,  while  sleeping  underground,  rolled  over.  Shooting  stars
were thought by the Wintu to be the spirits of dead shamans who were

Native World Views

63

doing a little traveling in the afterlife. The Northern Lights were thought
to be a portent of epidemic illness that would later visit the village. A
dust spiral near the house was interpreted as the presence of the spirit of
a dead relative. . . . Such omens were part of the beliefs of all California
tribes. . . .

Morality can be construed as an element of world view. This aspect of
behavior rises to the fully conscious level in some groups where moralis-
tic precepts were openly spoken of and formed the basis for interperson-
al behavior. For the Luiseno, ethical principles were formulated in a rit-
ualistic context in the form of addresses given to boys and girls who were
being initiated into adulthood. The ethical or moral principles must be
observed  lest,  as  the  people  were  warned,  supernatural  avengers  would
punish them with sickness or death. The impending punishment was, in
short,  concretely  physical  rather  than  merely  one  of  incurring  the  dis-
pleasure  of  the  supernatural  spirit  overseers  of  men.  The  “sermon”
addressed to boys at their ritual induction into manhood when they are
gathered around the sacred sandpainting went:

The earth hears you, the sky and wood mountain see you. If
you will believe this you will grow old. And you will see your
sons and daughters, and you will counsel them in this manner,
when you reach your old age. And if when hunting you should
kill a hare or rabbit or deer, and an old man should ask you for
it, you will hand it to him at once. Do not be angry when you
give it, and do not throw it to him. And when he goes home
he will praise you, and you will kill many, and you will be able
to shoot straight with the bow. . . .

These  are  the  kinds  of  concepts  Native  Californians  developed  to
understand their worlds and to serve as guides for their behavior in them.
Europeans destroyed or radically altered much of the environment and
introduced by force or precept very different ways of conceiving the rela-
tions of man and nature. Ancient and efficient ecologies were disrupted
before adequate and sympathetic records could be made that would pro-
mote understanding of what must have been a whole series of different
integrated native philosophical systems.

64

Indian Lands

FURTHER READINGS

Almaguer, Tomas. Racial Fault Lines: The Historical Origins of White Suprema-

cy in California. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994.

Anderson, Kat, and Thomas C. Blackburn, eds. Before the Wilderness: Envi-
ronmental  Management  by  Native  Californians. Menlo  Park,  CA:  Ballena
Press, 1993.

Bean, Lowell J. Mukat’s People: The Cahuilla Indians of Southern California.

Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972.

Cook, Sherburne F. The Conflict between the California Indian and White

Civilization. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1943.

Cook,  Sherburne  F.  Migration  and  Urbanization  of  the  Indians  in  California.

Baltimore, n.p. 1943.

Cook,  Sherburne  F.  The  Population  of  the  California  Indians,  1769–1970.

Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976.

Couro, Ted. San Diego County Indians as Farmers and Wage Earners. Ramona,

CA: Ramona Pioneer Society, 1975.

Dippie,  Brian  W.  The  Vanishing  American:  White  Attitudes  and  U.S.  Indian

Policy. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1982.

Du Bois, Constance Goddard. The Condition of the Mission Indians of South-
ern California. Philadelphia: Office of the Indian Rights Association, 1901.
DuBois, Cora. Wintu Ethnography. Berkeley: University of California Press,

1935.

Dutton,  Bertha  P.  The  Rancheria,  Ute,  and  Southern  Paiute  Peoples. Engle-

wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1976.

Gayton,  Anna  Hadwick.  Yokuts  and  Western  Mono  Ethnography. Berkeley:

University of California Press, 1948.

Heizer,  Robert  F.  Aboriginal  California. Berkeley:  University  of  California

Press, 1963.

Heizer,  Robert  F.,  ed.  The  Destruction  of  California  Indians:  A  Collection  of
Documents from the Period 1847 to 1865. Santa Barbara: Peregrine Smith,
1974.

Heizer, Robert F., and A. J. Almquist. The Other Californians: Prejudice and
Discrimination under Spain, Mexico, and the United States to 1920. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1977.

Heizer, Robert F., and Albert B. Elsasser. The Natural World of the California

Indians. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980.

Heizer, Robert F., and T. K. Whipple, eds. The California Indians: A Source

Book. Berkeley University of California Press, 1971.

Hundley,  Norris.  The  Great  Thirst:  Californians  and  Water,  1770s–1990s.

Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.

Further Readings

65

Hurt,  R.  Douglas.  Indian  Agriculture  in  America:  Prehistory  to  the  Present.

Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1997.

Hurtado,  Albert  L.  Indian  Survival  on  the  California  Frontier. New  Haven:

Yale University Press, 1988.

Kroeber, A. L. Handbook of the Indians of California. Washington, DC: Gov-
ernment Printing Office, Smithsonian Institute Bureau of American Eth-
nology, 1925.

Lewis, David Rich. Neither Wolf nor Dog: American Indians, Environment, and

Agrarian Change. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.

Lewis, H. T. Patterns of Indian Burning in California: Ecology and Ethnohistory.
Ballena  Press  Anthropological  Papers,  No.  1.  Ramona,  CA:  Ballena  Press,
1973.

Margolin, Malcolm. The Ohlone Way: Indian Life in the Monterey–San Fran-

cisco Bay Area. Berkeley: Heyday Books, 1978.

Margolin, Malcolm. The Way We Lived: California Indian Reminiscences, Sto-

ries, and Songs. Berkeley: Heydey Books, 1981.

McEvoy, Arthur. The Fisherman’s Problem: Ecology and Law in the California

Fisheries, 1850–1980. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

Merriam, C. Hart. The Dawn of the World: Myths and Tales of the Miwok Indi-

ans of California. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1993.

Miller, Joaquin. My Own Story (Or, My Life amongst the Modocs). Chicago:

Belford-Clarke, 1890.

Powers, Stephen. The Northern California Indians: A Reprinting of 19 Articles
on California Indians, Originally Published 1872–77. Berkeley: Department
of Anthropology, University of California, 1975.

Shipek,  Florence  C.  Pushed  into  the  Rocks:  Southern  California  Indian  Land

Tenure, 1769–1986. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1988.

Solnit, Rebecca. Savage Dreams: A Journey into the Hidden Wars of the Amer-

ican West. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1994.

Turner,  Allen  C.  The  Kaibab  Paiute  Indians:  An  Ecological  History. New

Haven, CT: Human Relations Area Files, 1985.

