 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Center for European Studies Working Paper Series #160 (2008) 

 (cid:1)French Suburbs(cid:1): A New Problem or  
a New Approach to Social Exclusion? 

 

by 

 

Prof. Sylvie Tissot 
Department of Sociology 

Marc Bloch University 

22 rue Descartes 

67084 Strasbourg cedex 

Tel. 33 3 88 41 73 00 
Fax 33 3 88 61 15 92 

stissot@umb.u-strasbg.fr 

 
 

Abstract 

 

 
At the end of 1980s, the question  of « quartiers sensibles » (at-risk neighborhoods) started 
to be very publicized in France. It was not  only the subject of many front-page articles, but also 
the target of a new public policy aimed at promoting urban and social development in about 500 
neighborhoods (Politique de la ville). I argue that such a focus on « quartiers sensibles » does not on-
ly result from increasing problems such as unemployment, poverty or juvenile delinquency ; it al-
so  represents  a  major  change  in  public  policy.  Focusing  on  « quartiers  sensibles »  directly  con-
tributed to the restructuring of the French welfare state by centering its action on specific urban 
spaces rather than national territory, and on social links rather than economic reality, contrary to 
what the welfate state claimed to do during the Fordist period. The outbreak of riots in Novem-
ber 2005 is inextricably bound up with the way some problems (like lack of communication and 
weakening  social links) have been associated  with  the question of « quartiers sensibles »  whereas 
the French model of integration, based on equality among abstract citizens, left some others (like 
ethnic discrimination) unquestioned. 
 

Crossing the Atlantic, speaking another language, entering a different academic environ-
ment  and  discovering  new  intellectual  traditions  have  many  benefits.  One  of  these  is  that  the 
process automatically calls into question the categories used to analyze society. It is particularly 
true  as  far  as  the  words  “suburbs”  in  English  and  “banlieue”  in  French  are  concerned.  While 
some wealthy cities and desirable neighborhoods do exist in the outskirt of Paris and other big 
cities, in French “banlieue” automatically evokes the image of housing projects, with young peo-
ple hanging around wearing baseball caps and sweatsuits, smoking joints, perhaps standing be-
side a burning car. “Banlieues” have become the symbol of a bleak urban environment, deviant 
youth and segregated minorities, whereas “suburb” in the United States designates quiet, weal-
thy areas, with nice, large houses and white middle- or upper-class families. Paradoxically, such 
gaps might be useful to expose the distant perspective I developed in my book on “French sub-
urbs” (Tissot 2007).  

 
My book, which seeks to challenge the consensus narrative about urban crisis, increasing 
racial or religious tensions and failure of the welfare state, is sometimes met with astonishment 
and even reproach in  France: shouldn’t sociologists  seek to  help “solve” the “problem of ban-
lieues” rather than endlessly “discussing” it? This complaint responds to the fact that the locus 
of my exploration of the “problem of banlieues” was not in the “banlieues” themselves. I analyzed 
what has been said on the suburbs since the mid-1980s, and studied the people who addressed 
this  question:  journalists,  civil  servants,  politicians,  experts,  statisticians,  sociologists,  social 
workers. In other words, I  did  not do fieldwork in the  banlieues; the people who appear in my 
book are not the people we watch on the nightly news, like those who participated in the No-
vember  2005  riots.  Instead,  I  analyzed  social  environments  that  are  not  usually  thought  of  as 
sites for sociological “fieldwork,” and people who are not generally considered subjects of socio-
logical interrogation: the people who write articles, books and reports, pass laws, make statistics; 
who count, classify, write, analyze. Drawing on Michel Foucault’s perspective, I decided to shift 
my attention from people who usually are counted, classified, and analyzed, to, instead, the peo-
ple who invent and use the tools, categories, words, concepts, languages to do these analyses. I 
was equally  inspired by  Pierre  Bourdieu’s  sociological perspective in the sense that  public  de-
bates were not my only material. I investigated the people who, while discussing the “problem 
of  the  suburbs,”  and  sometimes  disagreed  on  the  interpretation  of  the  problem,  promulgated 
new  ways  of  thinking  and  new  political  programs  (Bourdieu  1992,  and  more  specifically  pp. 
209-210).  What  analysis  of  the  “problem”  ultimately  prevailed  and  what  social  logics  made  it 
prevail?  What  consequences  for  the  material  world  did  this  analysis  have?  My  book  seeks  to 
answer these questions.  

 

The “reality” of the banlieues 
 

The  word  “banlieue”  is  not  new;  it  has  taken  on  many  different  meanings,  depending 
upon contexts and periods of history. More recently, the expression “quartiers sensibles” (literally 
“vulnerable neighborhoods”) appeared as part of the current terminology in public debates on 
urban  crisis  beginning  in  the  late  1980s;  it  was  unknown  before  then.  More  importantly,  since 
that time (the mid-1980s), both expressions, “banlieues” and “quartiers sensibles” (suburbs and un-
derprivileged  areas),  as  well  as  others  like  “quartiers  difficiles”–(problem  neighborhoods),  or 
“cités” (projects), have come into ubiquitous use in discussing socioeconomic topics. As a conse-
quence,  poverty, inequality or  unemployment are no  longer  discussed, or rather, they are  dis-
cussed only through territorial categories. Socioeconomic language has given way to a language 
of  space.  And  urban  crisis  seems  to  epitomize  all  problems  faced  by  French  society,  from  the 
failure of the welfare state to concerns about the French model of integration.  

 

 

I argue that the sudden and intense focus on urban crisis is not the consequence of grow-
ing segregation, rising unemployment, newly threatening youth delinquency or a collapse of the 
welfare state. As the sociologist Herbert Blumer posited, “social problems” do not exist in them-
selves,  but  rather  are  the  result  of  a  social  process  whereby  some  material  changes  are  desig-
nated serious and urgent (Blumer 1971). This constructivist perspective does not mean that nei-
ther  “reality”  nor  “problems”  exist,  or  that  problems  were  just  fabricated,  that  these  are  sheer 
linguistic inventions, with no relation whatsoever to the material world. The history of the pub-
lic housing areas is not a happy one, though it is not as bleak as it is often presented. Most public 
housing in France was built between the mid-1950s and the mid-1970s. It was designed more or 
less on a standardized and highly recognizable architectural pattern: tall, large projects, which 
often  house  thousands  of  people.  They  were  built  very  quickly,  often  with  little  respect  for 
manufacturing standards in terms of quality and safety. Consequently, many of them are now 
considerably rundown.  

 
But, until the 1970s, there was a fair degree of social diversity among the people living in 
public  housing.  After  World  War  II  France  faced  a  significant  shortage  of  housing  and  many 
families, even middle-class ones, had a very hard time finding a place to live. For them, getting 
into one of the projects meant upward mobility. The then-new buildings provided space, light, 
and modern comforts like a bathroom and proper heating. In the 1950s and 1960s, the projects 
were a symbol of modernity and the great potential of the welfare state to promote the public in-
terest, both by guaranteeing social rights (including access to modern accommodations) and by 
subsidizing a large-scale construction industry, thus encouraging economic growth. 

 
Since  that  auspicious  beginning,  three  phenomena  have  dramatically  changed  the  for-
tunes of the public housing developments. During this period (mid-1950s until mid-1970s), for-
eign nationals living  in France  had almost  no access to public  housing.  Discrimination against 
immigrants, and especially against those from North Africa, and particularly from Algeria, was 
widespread. It was not until the mid-1970s that foreigners could get into the projects, and until 
then, many of them lived in slums. But in the early 1970s, the government launched a major “re-
vitalization”  project,  aimed  at  destroying  the  slums,  and  public  housing  corporations  were 
forced to let more immigrants, especially the recently displaced, into the projects.  

 
Further,  in  the  mid-1970s,  the  French  government’s  approach  to  housing  underwent  a 
major  shift.  Instead  of  building  projects,  the  government  began  to  promote  individual  houses 
and  access  to  private  property.  The  government  made  low-interest  loans  available  to  many  of 
the  middle-class  families  who  lived  in  public  housing,  families  that  consequently  left  to  buy 
their own homes. Given that many of these families viewed the concurrent arrival of large num-
bers of foreigners as a degradation of their environment, they were all the more anxious to leave.  

 
Finally,  at  this  time,  many  public  housing  residents,  especially  in  communities  around 
Paris, worked in large factories. They had been  hired in large  numbers in the 1960s, when the 
factories needed unskilled labor. In the late 1970s and into the 1980s, these factories engaged in 
large-scale downsizing. Often, the first to be fired were foreigners. In combination with the other 
developments  just  discussed,  this  also  meant  that  many  residents  of  the  “banlieues”  found 
themselves unemployed.  

Because of these three phenomena, the social composition of the projects changed rapid-
ly  between  the  early  1970s  and  today,  and  the  unemployment  rate  has  continually  soared  in 
these neighborhoods since late 1970s. Nevertheless, it was not until the late 1980s that the ques-
tion of “suburbs” began to be highly publicized. At that time, it became not only the subject of 
many front page articles, conferences, books, reports and statistical analyses, but also the target 

 

2

 

of a new  public policy aimed at promoting  urban and  social  development in about 500 neigh-
borhoods (Politique de la ville). According to the consensus that formed around the idea, social is-
sues in general could not be addressed in France without centering research and public policy 
on these urban spaces.  

 
Does  it  mean  that  such  focus  on  banlieues  or  quartiers  simply  resulted  from  increasing 
problems? In fact, there is a more complex relation between the material world and categories, 
problems and words. The category of quartiers is not a neutral one; rather, use of this word indi-
cates  a  major  change  in  the  approach  to  social  exclusion,  which  itself  has  given  rise  to  a  new 
paradigm in French society and a new urban reform. The new paradigm approaches social ex-
clusion through a growing but disguised racialization of discussions of poverty, with territorial 
categories functioning as euphemized racial categories, as well as through the question of social 
ties rather than economic hardships.  

 
But is it really worth studying the terms of these debates when problems in the banlieues 
seem to be so pressing ? I argue that such analysis is not only fruitful but necessary because, on 
the ground, discourse is not “just words.” Far from being separate, words are a dimension of re-
ality. As Christian Topalov explains, “The lexical systems and their transformations can thus be 
inscribed in the social processes where the ‘representations’ are integral parts of the ‘reality.’ The 
representations are no longer regarded as, in effect, objective (scientific), biased (ideological), or 
arbitrary  (cultural)  reflections of a social  world already in  place, but as forms of experience of 
that world, as  media  for  situating and displacing it, eventually  for changing it”(Topalov 2002: 
375).  Currently,  “banlieue”  or  “quartiers  sensibles”  are  words  through  which  one  sees  and  ana-
lyzes urban environment and urban problems, and urban environment and urban problems do 
not exist independently of categories of perception. They make us see the world from a certain 
point of view. Moreover, these categories are not only conceptual categories but also categories 
of public action: as I  demonstrate, analysis of the “problem of the  banlieues” was promoted by 
social actors powerful enough not only to popularize and legitimize their views, but also to cre-
ate new programs, with significant funding and personnel charged with transforming the “ban-
lieues” to conform to their own diagnosis of the problem. 

 
The  first  impact  of  these  spatial  categories  was  the  emergence  of  race  in  debates  over 
poverty. In public debates, swiftly and on a unanimous basis, banlieues began to be used as a eu-
phemism to designate populations defined by ethnic background. Yet because of this strategy, I 
argue, the emergence of ethnicity issues did not lead to acknowledgement and investigation of 
questions of racism and discrimination, but rather ended up obscuring the way race is a factor.  

 

The meaning of ethnicization  
 

The generally accepted idea about France is that, contrary to the U.S., we talk about class 
but not about race. This emphasis on class rather than race means that, officially at least, the rec-
ognition  by  the  state  of  universal  citizens,  abstracted  from  social  and  economic  conditions 
(whether residential, religious or racial) is supposed to guarantee access to equality, and also the 
successful integration of immigrants into French society. Thus, the question of poverty is tradi-
tionally addressed through color-blind, state-run programs aimed at reducing inequalities, with-
out consideration for the role  race  plays  in inequalities.  However, as historians showed, racial 
categories were not absent from French public policies and legislation (Lewis 2007, Saada 2007). 
The emergence of the discourses on “banlieues” in the late 1980s marks a turning point, as they 
brought ethnicity explicitly to the forefront of the debates and made ethnicity a legitimate way 
of speaking about social questions.  

 

3

 

 
Several  sources  document  this  phenomenon,  including  articles  in  ten  different  news-
papers and news weeklies published after two riots: the first one occurring during summer 1981 
in the outskirts of Lyon, and the other, also in the outskirts of Lyon, in Vaulx-en-Velin in Octo-
ber  1990.  In  addition  to  press  reports,  I  used  parliamentary  debates  over  the  so-called  “anti-
ghetto law” passed in 1991. Strikingly, two very similar events (youth violence, burnt cars, loot-
ing)  received  substantially  different  reactions  and  analyses  in  these  forums.  In  1990  and  1991, 
unlike 1981, not only was media coverage huge (with entire front pages devoted to the “riots”), 
but  the  words  “quartiers”  or  “banlieues”  were  used  systematically,  by  virtually  everyone:  jour-
nalists from all different newspapers–Communist, left-wing, centrist and right-wing–as well as 
Communist, Socialist, centrist, and right-wing  deputies and  senators. This total  consensus was 
indicative  of  a  new  lexical  regime  that  included  “quartiers,”  “banlieues,”  “cites,”  “ghettos,”  but 
also “exclusion,” “segregation” and many metaphors based on space (“urban crisis,” “urban ques-
tion”).  The  consensus  was  utterly  uniform,  and  also  very  new.  In  1981,  these  words  were  un-
known  (only  “grands  ensembles”  was  used),  and  riots  were  seen  as  local  events,  rather  than  as 
symptoms of a major new “social problem” faced by French society.  

 
Not only the terminology but also the diagnosis of an intrinsic link between the question 
of “banlieues” and the question of immigration (or even illegal immigration) drew a widespread 
consensus. We might think this interpretation is only logical, as immigrants have been increas-
ingly numerous in public housing since late 1970s. However the association was not neutral: the 
problem of “banlieues” was defined as a problem posed by  immigrants, and  more precisely by 
their supposedly insurmountable cultural and religious differences. This assessment was based 
on a narrative in which former Catholic immigrants, Poles, Italians, Portuguese or Spanish peo-
ple  successfully  integrate  into  French  society,  whereas  Muslim  and  Arab  newcomers,  from 
Africa,  were  “too  different”  to  integrate.  In  addition  to  unemployment  (which  noticeably  at-
tracted  much less attention), the  percentage of immigrants in  some areas, the  lack  of what the 
French call “social diversity,” and the transformation of French neighborhoods into American-
style ghettos were considered the main causes of the explosion of social turmoil.  

 
In all the parliamentary debates, not a single word was said about what caused the out-
break of the 1990 riots: the death of a youth from an immigrant background, after his motorcycle 
crashed at a police roadblock. If the “mal-vivre” (psychological suffering) was lamented, not a 
single  word  was  said  about  the  antagonistic  relationships  between  police  and  youth  in  these 
neighborhoods, or more broadly the discrimination faced by young people. Race openly entered 
public arenas, but racism stayed outside the terms of debate.  

 
In addition to newspapers and parliamentary debates, I went through forty-five years of 
a journal (from 1960 until 1995), uncovered more evidence of the emergence of a new terminol-
ogy that at once highlights the question of race and evacuates the question of racism. This jour-
nal is called  Esprit. Founded  in the 1930s by a Catholic intellectual,  Esprit gained a large audi-
ence after World War II, and became the site of intense debates among politicians, intellectuals 
and civil servants over reforms of the welfare state.  

I  systematically  selected  the  issues  and  the  articles  addressing  the  question  of  segrega-
tion and singled out two major periods when this issue was intensely and frequently discussed. 
The period of the late 1960s and early 1970s witnessed a sharp increase in the number of articles 
dealing with the situation of migrants in slums and their exploitation (the word “exploitation” 
reveals  the  importance  of  Marxist  thought  or  at  least  class  rhetoric  in  French  intellectual  de-
bates).  In  Esprit in the late 1960s through early 1970s, segregation also  designated social life in 
projects designed by architects, urban planners and social workers, accused of being the agents 

 

4

 

of a state normalization (here again, word choice is telling: “normalization” is very indicative of 
Foucault’s influence on intellectual and activist circles). 

 
“Exploitation” and “normalization,” however,  disappear  from the terms of  debate over 
the course of the 1980s. Segregation, on the other hand, comes up again in the 1980s, although 
inscribed  in  a  new  epistemic  regime.  At  this  point  segregation  became  a  synonym  for  “exclu-
sion,” a term which, unlike its role in the United States, is relatively new to France, and desig-
nates socioeconomic phenomena, but from a very specific angle. It has been conceptualized by 
sociologists such as Alain Touraine to describe a social  question which, in Touraine’s view, no 
longer relates to economic exploitation but rather refers to the fact that people are relegated to 
specific neighborhoods: “quartiers,” “banlieues,” “ghettos” (Touraine 1991). In that paradigm, “ex-
clusion,” “immigration” and “urban crisis” seem to be inextricably intertwined, but with a criti-
cal change since late 1960s: since that moment, economic phenomena are no longer central, as I 
will explain later, and immigrants are no longer seen by Esprit’s contributors as workers but as 
residents; they are associated with problem of cohabitation, a lack of social diversity and the cri-
sis of model of integration: no longer are they linked to the economic problems they themselves 
face.  

 
This shift from a socioeconomic approach to a racial perspective can be seen beyond de-
bates  on  “banlieues”  as  well.  But  I  argue  that  the  discussions  of  the  “banlieues”  facilitated  this 
shift, with spatial categories like “quartiers défavorisés” and “quartiers sensibles” working as inter-
mediary stages. On one hand, these last two still have a social connotation because they evoke 
poverty. In that sense, to speak about “quartiers sensibles” seems to imply a commitment to poor 
people and minorities. That is why initially at least, the focus on this category was considered a 
progressive approach.  But, on the other hand, and more and  more as time went by, it increas-
ingly evoked strangeness, danger and threat. In fact, the word “sensible” (sensitive) has a double 
meaning: “sensible” is close to “difficile” (difficult) or “défavorisés” (impoverished), but it also re-
fers to something “at risk” that can explode at any time, thus raising the specter of riots. As a re-
sult, the working classes are no longer people who should be helped or who have rights to de-
fend; rather they are seen as dangerous classes.  

 
The role played by spatial categories is even more striking as they contributed to shape 
public policies. Ethnicization here becomes an important concept, but one which needs careful 
definition. Ethnicization first means a shift in focus from socioeconomic hardships to racial con-
flicts. This shift was legitimized by the thesis described and refuted by Loïc Wacquant: French 
banlieues are becoming American ghettos (Wacquant 2007). This supposed parallel between the 
two contexts was poorly documented (and, as I say, ultimately disproven), but nonetheless ex-
tensively used by journalists and it played a crucial role in the ethnicization of social questions. 
However, I argue ethnicization is not only the erroneous importation of foreign categories, those 
of race. Of course, focusing on supposedly threatening origins and life styles obscures how im-
migrants (as well as native-born French) experience poverty and unemployment, which are key 
factors in urban marginality. But a crucial feature of ethnicization is also the refusal of address-
ing the obstacles race creates for the racialized people.  

 
This comes into  focus when we examine  how programs targeting the 500 “quartiers” of 
the  Politique  de  la  ville  were  designed.  Indeed  the  shift  in  Esprit  is  important  because,  as  I  will 
explain later, Esprit’s pages were dominated by the network of social actors who participated in 
promoting the category of “quartiers sensibles” between 1985 and 1995–and were so sucessful that 
a new public  policy, the  Politique  de  la  ville, emerged. These programs were implemented with 
this ambivalent perspective on ethnicity: by marking the  predominantly immigrant “quartiers” 

 

5

 

as the problem area, ethnicity was implicitly invoked, but racism and discrimination continued 
to go unmentioned. Here we see how debates and analyses construct public policies: the depic-
tions of immigrants had a direct impact on how the social problems were taken into account (or 
not taken into account) in public action.  

 
The November 2005 riots illustrate the impact of this definition of social exclusion. These 
riots, like all the riots that have taken place since the 1990s, are undoubtedly linked to the way 
the  question  of  “banlieues”  was  conceived  in  the  1980s  and  1990s.  Notably,  the  2005  riots  fol-
lowed an event similar to that of the earlier riots: the death of youth after a dispute or arrest by 
the police. In this case, two teenagers died in an electric plant, while being pursued by the po-
lice. Importantly, though, these teenagers were not fleeing because they had committed a crime 
(contrary to Minister of Interior Nicolas Sarkozy’s claim at that time, which was false). Rather, 
they fled for fear of being arrested by the police, fear of being arbitrarily sent to the police station 
and, as a  consequence,  being  unable to break the Ramadan  fast that evening  with their family 
(Le Goaziou and Mucchilli 2006).  

 
Those fears may not have been founded in this instance, but they must also be seen as a 
consequence of the often violent and arbitrary attitude of the police towards youth, and the deep 
hostility  of  the  youth  toward  the  police  force,  which  they  tend  to  consider  as  illegitimate  and 
racist. If discrimination is a widespread phenomenon, confirmed by such documents as the re-
ports of the  Commission  nationale  de  Déontologie  Sécurité (the  National Commission for Ethics in 
Security) as well as academic research (Fassin and  Fassin 2006), why has it  been so  constantly 
overlooked? Within the conceptual and institutional categories of the “banlieues” and “quartiers,” 
immigrants became people who create problems rather than people who face problems; the con-
sequences of discrimination became irrelevant, even invisible in this frame.  

 

The reduction to the question of social ties  
 

As  Hillary  Silver  explains,  social  exclusion  has  been  defined  in  Europe  as  a  multi-
dimensional  phenomenon  and  not  only  as  a  economic  one  (Silver  2003).  I  argue  that,  in  the 
French context, the programs designed to address exclusion in banlieues went in the opposite di-
rection;  instead  of  expanding  to  include  more  of  the  relevant  factors  in  urban  marginality, 
French policy on the banlieues significantly narrowed the definition of social exclusion by focusi-
ng on social ties to the  detriment of attention to  systemic economic  problems. Thus, they  pro-
vided the bases for a new model of urban policies, which challenged the foundations of the wel-
fare state.  

 
From the 1980s, programs were implemented in the 500 “quartiers sensibles.” The first sig-
nificant characteristic of these programs was that they targeted specific areas, and were locally 
run.  A  second  major  aspect  of  these  programs  aimed  to  address  all  aspects  of  exclusion.  The 
Politique de la ville was founded initially by activists and organizers who denounced the central-
ized, state-run and, in their view, undemocratic housing policies implemented in the 1950s and 
1960s.  They  forcefully  argued  that  the  technocratic  production  of  public  housing  and  the  ab-
sence  of  dialogue  with  the  local  population  or  local  authorities  were  the  causes  of  the  current 
situation of the “banlieues.” They called for a focus on quality rather than quantity, on social life 
rather  than  construction,  and  on  localized  action  rather  than  state-run  planning.  These  actors 
promoted the category of “quartier sensible,” which was thus constructed as a shorthand for their 
analysis: not only would the quartier be the locus of urgent social problems, but also, even more 
importantly,  it became the relevant level for addressing those  problems,  via a focus on “social 
ties.”  

 

6

 

 
This  diagnosis  of  the  social  ills  of  the  banlieues  provided  the  theoretical  basis  for  pro-
grams designed to strengthen social ties, promote community groups and enhance civic partici-
pation. This is what I call a new urban reform because it stands in sharp contrast to the urban 
reform founded at the beginning of twentieth century and implemented after World War II, as 
analyzed  by  Susana  Magri  and  Christian  Topalov  (Magri  and  Topalov,  1987).  Since  1945,  the 
welfare state, considered the best agent for promoting general interest, had been in charge of im-
plementing standardized programs on a national scale. But with this new reform, public action 
no  longer  focused  on  large-scale  housing  production  coordinated  by  the  national  state.  Urban 
policy would be administered  by local agents, private actors and associations, in order to pro-
mote civic participation and social diversity (rather than social justice and equality), now imag-
ined to be the appropriate remedies for the “banlieues.”  

 
But  how  could  the  rather  marginalized  political  actors  such  as  activists  and  organizers 
turn  their  diagnosis  into  a  reform  that  would  have  such  significant  consequences,  not  only  in 
terms  of  urban  planning,  but  also  in  terms  of  the  history  of  the  welfare  state?  Of  course,  they 
gained credibility as rioting and tensions in banlieues increased. But the more comprehensive ex-
planation stretches back to the 1960s.  First, the  growing  crisis for the post-World War II  plan-
ning model opened the way for new approaches to urban politics: the projects built in the 1960s 
became increasingly rundown and in need of renovation, and the proponents of civic participa-
tion  provided  new  tools  and  ideas.  These  tools  and  ideas  were  met  with  enthusiasm  because 
they seemed to be able not only to renovate the buildings, but also to impact social life (thus pre-
venting future riots). 

  
Political and economic contexts also helped make possible the Politique de la ville reforms. 
The policy was  implemented in the 1980s and 1990s, at a time  when the  European  Union was 
calling  for  a  reduction  of  inflation  and  limits  on  budget  deficits;  Keynesian  spending  policies 
were no longer viable for the Socialist Party. In that context, social policies that focused on speci-
fic  urban  territories  and  on  social  ties  became  politically  legitimate.  For  the  left-wing  govern-
ments in office at that time, the Politique de la ville became a way of implementing social policies 
still  supposedly  faithful  to  their  traditional  political  values,  but  without  increasing  the  budget 
deficit. At the same time, this shift contributed to the decreasing concern for the question of un-
employment as such.  

 
Surprisingly,  this  diminishing  interest  in  the  question  of  unemployment  occurred  even 
as actual rates of  unemployment rose throughout the 1980s. This was possible also  because of 
the domestic political conditions under which the founders of Politique de la ville turned their po-
litical ideology into categories of public policies. In this period, these former members of Com-
munist, Trotskyite, Maoist and Socialist associations and parties, which were very powerful and 
numerous after May 1968, were hit hard by the severe decline of protest in the late 1970s. Their 
ideological systems became radically suspect. More practically speaking, many of them also had 
to find new jobs. The Politique de la ville and the focus on “quartiers sensibles” offered these activ-
ists opportunitites for  both social engagement and  professional  stability. They also  saw in this 
public policy the possibility of implementing their ideas rather than being confined to marginal 
positions and theoretical controversies. To improve the situation in the “quartiers sensibles” gave 
them a new cause, even if it limited action to the local level, and obscured the structural and eco-
nomic issues that were still at the core of their Marxist thought. 

 
Another  factor  paving  the  way  for  the  Politique  de  la  ville  was  the  huge  discrediting  of 
French politicians in the 1980s and 1990s. During the two presidential terms of François Mitter-

 

7

 

rand  (1981-1995),  several  financial  scandals  hit  the  Socialist  Party,  which  also  was  accused  of 
failing to live up to campaign promises. As a consequence, a gap widened between citizens and 
politicians, as we see in decreasing voter turnout, especially among the working class. In an at-
tempt to relegitimize their status, many politicians, especially mayors, sought to promote local 
democracy. The Politique de la ville was thus appealing not only because it defined the lack of so-
cial ties as the key problem, but also because it created more contact with residents of the most 
impoverished suburbs where voter turnout was the lowest. 

 
The last factor which explains the focus on social ties to the exclusion of attention to eco-
nomic  hardships  relates  to  the  relationships  between  social  science  and  public  planning.  The 
journal Esprit, in conjunction with non-profit organizations like ATD-Quart Monde, as well as so-
ciologists and civil  servants, theorized the “social exclusion” paradigm, that is, a lack of  social 
integration as the source of economic woes (Fassin 1996). Specifically, the social exclusion para-
digm as it emerged in France in the late 1980s was based on the sociological narrative of the shift 
from industrial to post-industrial society. For this reason, there were many conferences as well 
as informal contacts which gathered intellectuals and people in charge of Politique de la ville. All 
these experts agreed that social problems could not be solved by focusing on the workplace and 
broad economic processes.  New attention  would instead  be paid to other places  like impover-
ished neighborhoods and to other phenomena like civic engagement and social ties. 

 
The  consequences  of  this  new  urban  reform  can  be  seen  on  a  very  local  level.  In  the 
course of research for my book, I conducted fieldwork in a small city in the Parisian “suburbs,” 
examining  how specific programs were implemented in three particular neighborhoods of this 
city, designated as “quartiers sensibles.” Several articles, published in the city magazine in 1994, 
give  an  interesting  description  of  these  three  neighborhoods.  Despite  the  fact  that  the  city  has 
been run by members of the French Communist party since the 1930s (a party which in France is 
part of the mainstream political system), social-economic classifications were never used in these 
articles.  Age  and  ethnic  dimensions,  by  contrast,  crop  up  frequently,  as  does  an  emphasis  on 
conflicts between adults and “youth” and between “immigrants” and “French.” Moreover, the 
journalist laments the degradation of projects but hardly mentions unemployment. The presen-
tation of the “problem of the neighborhood” in these articles is based on exactly this perspective: 
it is useless to do anything until social ties are reconstructed (not, notably, until economic oppor-
tunity is improved). Ultimately intervention in this city resulted in the creation of neighborhood 
committees, more dialogue between public housing corporations and residents, and some fund-
ing for youth associations–but the  distrust of youth, especially youth with an immigrant back-
ground,  remained  strong  (Masclet  2003).  And  in  any  event,  none  of  these  programs  proved 
enough to stem the tide of riots as economic disparity continued, and immigrants continued to 
be portrayed more broadly as the causes of social and economic ills, rather than as the bearers of 
the brunt of those ills. 

 

Shall we get rid of spatialization to address the question of poverty? 
 

Thus, in my view, it is not satisfactory to describe the situation of the “suburbs” as the re-
sult of “urban crisis” and  develop an analysis solely on this plane.  As  Pierre  Bourdieu argues, 
“the perfectly commendable wish to go see things in person, close up, sometimes leads people to search for 
the  explanatory  principles  of  observed  realities  where  they  are  not  to  be  found  (not  all  of  them,  in  any 
case), namely at the site of observation itself. The truth about what happens in the ‘problem suburbs’ cer-
tainly does not lie in these usually forgotten sites that leap into the headlines from time to time” (Bour-
dieu  1999:  181).  The  situation  of  “suburbs,”  with  their  very  high  levels  of  unemployment  and 
ongoing tensions between youth and police, are also the consequences of how, when the prob-

 

8

 

lem  of  “suburbs”  emerged,  some  problems  were  deemed  more  urgent  and  other  constantly 
overlooked.  In  this  we  see  that  the  relationship  between  concepts  and  the  material  world  is 
deeply  complex.  Categories  are  not  just  words  that  have  an  impact  on  reality;  rather  they  are 
reality.  But,  at  the  same  time,  these  categories  do  not  spring  arbitrarily  from  the  minds  of  the 
clever, nor from an abstract sky of ideas; they are the product of social phenomena such as the 
history of activism and left-wing parties since May 1968, and the transformation of urban plan-
ning and the complex relationships between science and policy. As a consequence, the history of 
“banlieues”  as  a  concept  should  be  considered  part  of  the  history  of  the  “banlieues”  on  the 
ground, and of the history of the entire French society. It is through such an approach that we 
can understand the continuing protest in the “banlieues” despite the numerous programs imple-
mented there.  

 
My book aims at questioning the focus on local urban territories, as it implied a contrac-
tion of the understanding of social questions. However, my point is not to say that spatial cate-
gories are necessarily dangerous. In the case of social exclusion, the meaning given to words in 
public debates and  public policies makes the  difference. The label “quartiers  sensibles” carries a 
negative connotation, and potentially increases stigmatization, but we need words to study the 
changes that have occurred in these places. Must we use words other than “quartiers sensibles”? 
Perhaps try to make new ones? Or should we retain “quartiers sensibles” or “banlieues,” following 
William Julius Wilson’s logic; after acknowledging that some groups can be stigmatized by the 
label “underclass,” Wilson writes: “it would be far worse to obscure the profound changes in the class 
structure and social behavior  of ghetto  neighborhoods  by avoiding the use of the  term underclass” (Wil-
son 1987: 8).  

 
It is nonetheless difficult to change the meaning of words, especially when they pervade 
thought and public action so deeply. In fact, the late 1990s and early 2000s have witnessed sig-
nificant  changes  in  the  ways  in  which  territorial  categories  are  used.  Still,  the  same  bias  con-
tinued  to  exist.  Since  the  late  1990s,  many  questions  have  emerged  while  being  systematically 
analyzed  in  the  strict  limits  of  the  concept  of  the  suburbs.  Why  is  voter  turnout  lower  and 
lower? Why is there a strong vote for Le Pen in France? Is Muslim fundamentalism rising? Have 
Arab youth become more sexist? Are women being forced to wear headscarves? Is there a new 
anti-Semitism?  These  questions  are  well  worth  asking.  But  are  they  intrinsically  linked  to  the 
problems of the “suburbs,” and only the suburbs? Spatial categories seem to allow us to think 
that once one is back in the wealthy, safe French major cities, all this disappears; equality, order 
and feminism prevail. Thus, we exempt a large portion of the population and institutions from 
critical  questioning  and  responsibility  for  social  problems,  as  if,  because  everything  goes  so 
terribly only in the  banlieues, in the French Republic, as  Voltaire–or  Candide–would have said, 
“all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds.” A very comforting but dangerous idea. 

 

Bibliography 

 
 

Blumer, Herbert. 1971. “Social problems as collective behavior,” Social Problems 18: 298-306. 
Bourdieu,  Pierre.  1999.  The  weight  of  the  world: social  suffering  in  contemporary  society.  Ox-

ford: Polity Press. 

Bourdieu, Pierre et Loïc Wacquant, 1992. Réponses : pour une anthropologie reflexive. Paris: Le Seuil. 
Fassin, Didier et Eric Fassin. 2006. De la question sociale à la question raciale? : représenter la société 
française. Paris: La Découverte, more specifically Jobart, Fabien, “Police, justice et discri-
minations raciales,” pp. 211-228. 

Fassin,  Didier.  1996.  “Exclusion,  underclass,  marginalidad,  Figures  contemporaines  de  la  pau-

 

9

 

vreté  urbaine  en  France,  aux  États-Unis  et  en  Amérique  latine,”  Revue  française  de 
sociologie 37,1: 37-75. 

Le Goaziou, Véronique et Laurent Mucchielli (dir.). 2006. Quand les banlieues brûlent… Retour sur 

les émeutes de novembre 2005. Paris: La Découverte. 

Lewis,  Mary  Dewhurst.  2007.  The  boundaries  of  the  republic: migrant  rights  and  the  limits  of  uni-

versalism in France, 1918-1940. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2007. 

Magri, Susanna et Christian Topalov. 1987. “De la cité-jardin à la ville rationalisée : un tournant 
du  projet  réformateur.  Etude  comparative  France,  Grande-Bretagne,  Italie,  Etats-Unis,” 
Revue française de sociologie 28,3 (Juillet-Septembre): 417-451. 

Saada,  Emmanuelle. 2007.  Les  enfants  de  la  colonie  :  les  métis  de  l'Empire  français,  entre  sujétion  et 

citoyenneté. Paris: La Découverte. 

Silver Hilary, with S. M. Miller. 2003. “Social Exclusion: The European Approach to Social Dis-

advantage,” Indicators 2,2 (Spring): 5-21. 

Tissot, Sylvie. 2007. L’Etat et les quartiers. Genèse d’une catégorie d’action publique. Paris: Le Seuil. 
Topalov, Christian (ed). 2002. Les divisions de la ville. Paris: Editions UNESCO, Editions de la Mai-

son des sciences de l’homme.  

Touraine, Alain. 1991. “Face à l’exclusion,” Esprit 169: 7-13. 
Wilson,  William  Julius.  1987.  The  Truly  Disadvantaged.  The  Inner  City,  the  Underclass  and  Public 

Policy. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 

 
 
 
 

 

10

