Violence and Peace

1.102 Peace and Conflict Studies

5 Nov 2014

What is violence? 
Which different forms of violence exist? 

„Violence is present when human beings are being influenced so that their acutal 

somatic and mental realizations are below their potential realizations“ 

(Galtung 1969: 168)

Implications for peace research… What is 
peace?

„If peace is regarded as the absence of violence, then thinking about peace 
… will be structured the same way as thinking about violence“ (p. 172)

-> Negative peace:

absence of war/ 

physical violence

-> Positive peace:

development,

participation, justice

What to think about Galtung‘s concepts?

• Peace as a social goal -> broadens the scope to domestic / 

societal conflicts

• The referring on a broad concept of violence instead of war 

allows to classify situations as non-peaceful even when
there is no ‚typical‘ war/ large scale violence

• Brings new perspectives for conflict resolution -> focus on 

structural causes of conflicts

• Still, peace is closely related to the absence of direct

violence and war

• Methodological difficulties: how to operationalize and

measure structural violence and positive peace?

• Broadening the terms peace and violence may lead to

arbitrary use

• The ‚invention‘ of structural violence can legitimize the use

of violence

• It is historically and contextually contingent what is

understood by ‚peace‘. Who has the legitimacy to define it?

Implications for CR… How to end violence/ to 
achieve peace?

• Peace by peaceful means? Peace as a process which itself 

must be peaceful, i.e. non-violent (ethics of conviction)

• Peace as a goal that can also be achieved by using violent 
means (i.e. military intervention to contain a war; violent 
revolution to end dictatorship) (ethics of responsibility)

• or a combination? 

“… a focus on personal violence in after-war periods lest they 
should become  between-war periods; and if the period protracts 
sufficiently for the major outburst of personal violence to be 
partly forgotten, we would expect a concentration on structural 
violence…” (Galtung 1969: 174)

References

• Galtung, Johan (1969): Violence, Peace, and Peace Research,  in: 

Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 6, pp. 167-198.

