C H A P T E R   4

Emotional Liberty

The  concept  of  emotives  elaborated  in  Chapter  3,  developed  in
response to a range of problems encountered by researchers on emo-
tions, has broad implications for the understanding of social life and
politics. The present chapter offers a preliminary exploration of these
implications. They will be spelled out in greater detail in Part II, which
examines a speciﬁc period of political and social change.

the  political 

implications  of 

Researchers  on  emotions  in  ﬁelds  other  than  anthropology  have 
frequently  neglected 
their  work. 
Psychologists  have  had  very  little  to  say  on  this  issue.  Philosophers 
and  historians  who  have  written  on  emotions  in  recent  years  have 
often  expressed  only  tangential  interest  in  the  political  dimension  of
their  ideas  (e.g.,  Solomon  1984,  1992;  De  Sousa  1987).  Speech  act 
theorists  have,  for  the  most  part,  treated  their  subﬁeld  as  a  highly 
technical one, concerning language and intention, requiring no explo-
ration  of  political  issues.  A number  of  philosophers,  historians,  and 
literary  critics  concerned  with  gender  have  recognized  the  political
implications  of  the  West’s  gendered  conception  of  emotions  (e.g.,
Greenspan  1988;  Jaggar  1989;  DeJean  1991;  Schiesari  1992;  Burack 
1994;  Roper  1994;  Pinch  1996  –  in  addition  to  the  anthropologists 
mentioned in Chapter 2). But these observers have focused their atten-
tion too much on redressing this imbalance and too little on the larger
implications  of  the  whole  mental  ontology  their  work  has  put  into
question.

Anthropologists  represent  an  important  exception  to  the  general
aversion  to  politics  displayed  by  researchers  on  emotions.  But  their
work  has  been  hampered  by  fear  of  ethnocentrism  and  the  ongoing 
critique  of  the  culture  concept;  and,  as  a  result,  those  working  on 
emotions tend to split according to whether they wish to offer politi-

112

Emotional Liberty

113

cal critiques of the West or political critiques of the social orders they
study. Anthropologists working on emotions, in addition, have lagged
far  behind  others  in  their  discipline  in  conceptualizing  historical
change. In this chapter I will show how the concept of emotives can
provide a foundation for a politically useful reconception of the rela-
tion  between  individual  and  collectivity,  that  is,  a  reconception  of
liberty. This idea of liberty will make possible, in turn, political analy-
sis of cultural variation and explanation of historical change, and it will
point toward a form of political engagement that is not reductionist,
condescending, or ethnocentric.

LIBERTY AND HISTORY IN THE ANTHROPOLOGY
OF EMOTIONS

As we saw in Chapter 2, anthropologists working on emotions have
confronted  a  severe  difﬁculty  in  attempting  to  make  political  judg-
ments of emotional regimes. Some have chosen to formulate a harsh
political critique of Western ideas about emotions, based on their ﬁnd-
ings in the ﬁeld. In non-Western contexts, they have found, emotions
are rarely regarded as private, quasi-biological responses that endan-
ger our reason; much more often they are valued as collective perfor-
mances. In addition, they have insisted that the wide range of variation
in  emotional  practices  undercuts  the  Western  biological  view.  Other
anthropologists  have  emphasized  the  emotional  impact  of  political
repression and exile in states such as Iran, China, or El Salvador, where
the local governments have engaged in policies of systematic violence
and disciplinary coercion that no Westerner would attempt to excuse.
But no anthropologist of emotions has offered a conceptual basis for
making  political  judgments  about  both  Western  and  non-Western 
practices  at  the  same  time,  including  communities  undergoing 
political  crisis  and  communities  whose  way  of  life  is  not  currently
subject to severe pressure from outside.

This difﬁculty has been compounded by an inability on the part of
anthropologists of emotion to talk about historical change in emotions
or  the  performances  associated  with  emotions.  While  most  practi-
tioners in the discipline have been won over to a strong awareness of
historical change, anthropologists of emotions have continued to use
the  “ethnographic  present”  in  describing  their  ﬁndings.  There  is  a
direct relation between this presentism and the roadblock to political

114

Part I. What Are Emotions?

judgment. Both stem from a problem in conceptualizing the emotional
individual.

The problem with the politics of emotions is understanding in what
way  the  individual  submits  and  why  it  matters.  Anthropologists  of
emotions have proven themselves highly sensitive to the workings of
political  institutions,  deference,  authority,  and  gender;  but  they  have
not been able to show what is at stake for the individual in submitting
to such institutions, in accepting and feeling the emotions prescribed
by  speciﬁc  family  organizations,  in  embracing  emotional  styles  that
render  them  humble,  obedient,  deferential  –  or  aggressive,  indepen-
dent,  arrogant.  Can  a  person  who  feels  an  emotion  that  is  a  learned
response, a product of social construction, be oppressed – in the polit-
ical sense of the term – by this feeling? The concept of emotions as used
in  the  West  is  closely  associated  with  the  individual’s  most  deeply
espoused goals; to feel love for one’s spouse or fear of one’s opponent,
presumably,  is  to  be  moved  by  those  things  one  most  authentically
wants. It is hard to see how a person can be oppressed by his or her
most authentic, most deeply embraced, goals. To make such a claim –
that  a  certain  person,  group,  or  community  is  politically  oppressed
without  knowing  it  –  would  require  that  one  be  prepared  to  assert
something  about  the  nature  of  the  individual.  Such  an  assertion,  by 
deﬁnition, would have to apply to the individual as universally con-
stituted,  outside  the  parameters  of  any  given  “culture.”  Who  would
have the temerity, today, to make positive claims about this politically
charged issue? The ethnocentric dangers of such essentialist discourse
have been so thoroughly rehearsed that many have chosen to fall silent,
despite the conceptual vacuum that results. Yet only on this evacuated
terrain  can  one  hope  to  formulate  a  critical  political  judgment  about
emotional culture. That power is exercised is of no consequence unless
there  is  something  at  stake.  What  is  it  the  individual  loses  by  sub-
mitting  to,  embracing  unreﬂectively,  a  collectively  constructed  emo-
tional common sense? If nothing, then we have no grounds upon which
to critique Western emotional common sense, and much of the femi-
nist, poststructuralist, and cultural critiques of the Western individual
offered in recent decades has no meaning or purpose. If there is some-
thing that can be lost, then it can be lost everywhere, by anyone.

There  are  two  practitioners  of  the  ethnography  of  emotion  who
come signiﬁcantly closer than others in the ﬁeld to providing a politi-
cally  grounded  historical  depiction  of  emotions,  Geoffrey  White  and
Unni  Wikan.  Their  work  deserves  a  brief  examination  here,  because

Emotional Liberty

115

both force us to appreciate the interlinked character of political judg-
ment and historical explanation.

Wikan, despite the ill-deﬁned character of her notion of resonance,
offers a clear-cut, full, and original analysis of the political dimension
of emotional expression, in her study Managing Turbulent Hearts: A Bali-
nese Formula for Living (Wikan 1990). As noted in Chapter 2, where pre-
vious  ethnographers  had  described  the  Balinese  as  almost  devoid  of
feeling,  Wikan  insists  that  Balinese  individuals  are  actually  engaged 
in a constant struggle to match their emotional expression to the strict
norms of the community.

To show how emotional management and political power interact,
Wikan tells the story of a school teacher who was ﬁred by the village
council  for  encouraging  too  much  independence  among  his  pupils.
Among those involved in ﬁring him was his closest friend, a powerful
local ﬁgure, who gave nothing away of the planned dismissal until the
last moment. The ﬁred teacher was openly disconsolate and embittered;
he repeatedly berated his wife – who attempted to keep up a smiling
face in the proper way, despite the humiliating and terrifying impro-
priety of her husband’s reactions. He denounced his powerful friend to
anyone who would listen. But his outbursts only ensured his increas-
ing marginalization. As with his teaching, so with his personal response
to dismissal, he was out of touch with the normative tone of village col-
lective self-control. Years later he discovered that his good friend, far
from being an instigator of the dismissal, had gone along with the plan
only out of fear of losing his own inﬂuence. Just as this powerful vil-
lager revealed nothing of the plan to his friend, so he said nothing of
his own efforts to counter it, leaving the former teacher to ﬁnd out in
his own way. In the end they were reconciled. Through this story, Wikan
allows  us  to  see  that  in  Bali  heroic,  virtuoso  self-management  in 
conformity with collective norms brings status and power.

Close examination of a case of deviance is rare in the anthropology
of  emotions,  precisely  because  most  practitioners  lack  a  conceptual
framework  for  situating  it.  Wikan’s  capacity  to  examine  the  political
implications of emotional expression is directly linked to her theory of
the “double-anchored self” which is presented as an alternative, and a
direct challenge, to the prevailing constructionism in the ethnography
of  emotions.  A double-anchored  self  maintains  an  equilibrium  by
effortful pursuit of expression to modify feeling and pursuit of feeling
to modify behavior – effortful pursuit aptly dubbed “management,” so
long as one remains aware that it is not easy to draw a line between

116

Part I. What Are Emotions?

what  manages  and  what  is  managed  within  this  self.  A self  that  is
double-anchored  is  a  self  that  cannot  be  encompassed  within  a  dis-
course or deﬁned by a practice; it is a self that can be molded by dis-
course, altered by practice to a signiﬁcant degree, but never entirely or
predictably, never to the same degree from one person to the next. The
double-anchored self, as Wikan conceives it, is quite close to the notion
of the disaggregated self presented in Chapter 3, in which the broad
range of activated thought material contrasts with the small scope of
the material that attention can deal with actively at any given time. The
Balinese concepts of face and heart capture this contrast and help them
think about the management efforts this contrast readily gives rise to.
But Wikan’s study is oriented entirely toward the present and offers no
account of historical change.

Geoffrey White does not propose to write a history of emotions in
his  important  study  of  the  island  of  Santa  Isabel  (Solomon  Islands),
Identity Through History (White 1991). But he has examined the perfor-
mance of emotion on Santa Isabel in other studies (White 1990a, 1990b)
and is alive to the process by which emotions are enacted and given
collective force as norms. As a result his historical research allows us
to glimpse, as perhaps no other historical ethnography has done, how
a politically meaningful history of emotions might be framed.

White’s painstaking collection and comparison of written and oral
accounts  of  the  conversion  and  subsequent  colonial  takeover  of  the
island allow him to piece together a gripping picture of its recent social
history. Prior to the ﬁrst successes of Anglican missionaries beginning
around 1890, the population of Santa Isabel had been greatly reduced
by  a  period  of  endemic  raiding.  The  operations  of  slave  traders  in 
the  region  encouraged  seafaring  groups  from  other  islands  in  the
Solomons, and from Santa Isabel itself, to make frequent expeditions
in pursuit of captives. Captives were sold to slave traders in return for
modern ﬁrearms and other supplies; captives were also used locally in
rituals of human sacriﬁce and cannibalism. Groups less adept at such
seaborne raiding moved into the highlands, concealing themselves in
the forests and building sturdy wooden forts. Coastal villages, once the
norm,  all  but  disappeared.  Both  seafarers  and  hill  groups  embraced
raiding,  warfare,  headhunting,  and  human  sacriﬁce  as  methods  of
ensuring  their  own  power  and  security.  The  political  focal  point  of
these raiding groups were “chiefs” whose status was partly hereditary,
partly based on proven prowess; chieﬂy lineage shrines sporting lines
of  enemies’  skulls  along  their  walls,  and  the  bones  of  predecessors

Emotional Liberty

117

inside,  sites  of  frequent  ceremonies,  shored  up  chiefs’  reputations  as
masterful possessors of secret knowledge and magical power.

Today,  islanders  emphasize  the  contrast  between  this  violent,
impoverished heathen past and the peaceful Christian present. White
rightly refuses to accept this contrast at face value. At the same time,
one is struck by the repetition of certain themes in the conversion nar-
ratives White analyzes, themes of missionary bravery and missionary
magical  power,  as  well  as  of  chieﬂy  recognition  that  a  peace  policy
might enhance their rule. For reasons difﬁcult to penetrate, many chiefs
saw in Christianity a new form of secret knowledge that might serve
as a potent source of legitimacy.

Central to Christian conversion was the new salience of an emotion
called nahma, a complex term which denotes soothing, gift giving, com-
promise,  settlement.  The  term  is  translated  locally  using  the  English
term “love”; nahma is considered to be the essential orientation of the
Christian  person.  In  local  practice,  the  new  centrality  of  nahma  was
associated with the willingness of chiefs to unite under the leadership
of great regional chiefs (already Christianized) who sent missionaries
to reside in their villages and teach the new ways.

White notes that older inhabitants of Santa Isabel remarked “a per-
ceived shift in ethos during their lives such that the constant vigilance
which  was  once  maintained  against  sorcery  and  tabu  violation  may
now  be  somewhat  relaxed”  (1991:246).  But  the  lives  of  the  previous
generation,  the  generation  of  conversion,  must  have  seen  an  even
deeper  shift  in  ethos;  open  violence  disappeared;  sorcery  and  tabu  –
because pagan – went underground; then, in the 1930s, colonial ofﬁ-
cials named headmen of their own choosing, threatening the power of
chieﬂy lineages. Nahma and skill at talking and negotiating replaced
warrior  prowess  as  instruments  of  inﬂuence;  and  because  Christian
conversion came prior to colony status, Christianity could serve as a
badge of indigenous identity and indigenous competence for self-rule.
The limits of this transformation are difﬁcult to gauge; White notes that
stories  of  the  pre-Christian  past  still  convey  “a  sense  of  vitality  and
accomplishment” and that fear of magic still shapes much daily behav-
ior (p. 40). The practice of rule on Santa Isabel, within the newly inde-
pendent state of the Solomon Islands, is a peculiar mix of traditional
oligarchic  elements,  church  inﬂuence,  and  Western-style  parliamen-
tarism that concentrates power in a few hands. Recent troubles on the
island of Guadalcanal underscore the ongoing fragility of this newly
established  polity,  which  is  certain  to  undergo  further  substantial 

118

Part I. What Are Emotions?

transformations. Still, it is hard not to empathize with those who cele-
brate the end of the raiding heyday of 1860–1900. Why should we not
celebrate  the  missionary  heroes,  both  British  and  Melanesian,  who
risked their lives to bring about this aim?

White notes that the feelings of natahni (sorrow) and kokhoni (sym-
pathy) of the thautaru song, sung on the occasion of sons’ inheriting the
houses and gardens of their fathers, also characterize the local senti-
ments toward the conversion period and its (chieﬂy and missionary)
heroes. They, like nurturant fathers, are invoked with sorrowful grati-
tude  in  special  thautaru  chants;  their  brave  actions  are  retold  in  the-
atrical reenactments. We cannot complacently imagine that justice now
reigns on Santa Isabel. But a profound historical turn that has enhanced
the place of nahma, natahni, and kokhoni on that island, replacing vio-
lence, slave trading, and malevolent magic as the foundation of polit-
ical legitimacy, ought to engage our respect and our gratitude.

How can we build a ﬁrm foundation for this kind of political judg-
ment,  so  that  it  is  not  vacuously  Eurocentric  and  “humanist”  (Abu-
Lughod  1991)?  From  the  foregoing  review  of  the  anthropological
literature emerges a list of requirements: We need a conceptual frame
that acknowledges the importance of management (as opposed to con-
struction) of emotion, that allows political distinctions among different
management styles on the basis of a concept of emotional liberty, and
that permits the narration of signiﬁcant historical shifts in such man-
agement styles. In the section that follows, I will build such a frame on
the foundation of the concept of emotives elaborated in the last chapter.

COORDINATION OF GOALS AND
EMOTIONAL NAVIGATION

In the following discussion, I employ the concept of “goal” in defer-
ence to its widespread current usage among psychologists. As Oatley
(1992) and Wegner (1994) note, any control mechanism must include
two functions: (1) the capacity to initiate and terminate an operation,
(2)  a  means  of  checking  the  status  of  the  operation.  These  two  func-
tions  correspond  to  the  two  parts  of  “if . . . then”  commands  in  soft-
ware  programs  or  to  the  two  elements  of  a  smoke  detector:  the
chemically  sensitive  switch  and  the  alarm  which  it  turns  on  and  off.
The nervous system of any animal obviously accomplishes thousands
of similar control functions. Within cognition, thoughts that are capable

Emotional Liberty

119

of both triggering and terminating subordinate thoughts or actions are
referred to as goals. Baars et al. (1997), for example, refer to the goal a
person is currently pursuing as a “goal image,” because this coherent
thought  must  supply  sufﬁcient  details  to  allow  many  unconscious
automatisms to initiate and terminate component tasks. Uttering a sen-
tence  requires  coordination  of  more  or  less  automatic  application  of
rules of syntax, more or less automatic search of a lexicon, command
of facial and oral muscles, and other capacities. It requires, in addition,
that the performance be monitored, so that slips or false starts can be
corrected. We are all aware of how halting and hesitant speech often
is,  as  monitoring  is  accomplished  and  interruptions  or  restarts  are 
initiated to keep the performance on track. Some hesitation may also
reﬂect shifts in the precise character of the goal of the utterance itself.
While psychologists have not explored the implications of goal co-
ordination very much, all recognize that goals overlap and mutually
implicate each other and that they must be organized into hierarchies.
Bower  (1992),  Oatley  (1992),  Clore  (1994),  and  anthropologist 
D’Andrade (1992), as noted in Chapter 1, have all pointed out the close
relationship that must exist between coordination of goals and emotion.
Strong  emotions  such  as  joy  or  grief  indicate  the  relevance  of  high-
priority goals to a present condition; sudden emotions such as the rapid
onset of fear or anger indicate that a goal not currently being pursued
must be given higher priority in response to a surprise or disappoint-
ment in the environment. In Chapter 1, I argued that it is the goal-rele-
vant  intensity  and  valence  of  emotions  that  renders  them  inherently
enjoyable or inherently uncomfortable. It is precisely here that emotions
become politically relevant, because they are capable of guiding action
long after explicit threats or explicit rules have been forgotten.

It is obvious by now that an adequate theory of emotions must be
built on an entirely new terrain, with newly deﬁned terms as free as
we can possibly make them of suspect ethnocentric implications. We
must take nothing for granted and provide an account for every issue
that may turn out to be important when we begin examining particular
cases.

Goal  coordination  is,  quite  simply,  an  issue  of  bewildering  com-
plexity,  for  those  who  do  it,  for  those  who  attempt  to  understand  it.
The environment is challenging; life will not continue unless a certain
number of goals are accorded high priority and their coordination is
assured. Coordination of behavior with others is also extraordinarily
rewarding.  Where  there  are  continuing  communities  of  successfully

120

Part I. What Are Emotions?

surviving individuals, we may presume that most members are con-
stantly engaged in the pursuit of a dense network of interrelated goals,
and that the community has deeply inﬂuenced the construction of most
individuals’ networks. Consider the example of a person who says, “I
am looking forward to getting married next week, but I just don’t want
to breathe any more.” Or, “The only reason I wear clothes is because
my mother told me to.” Such statements would be regarded as deviant
in  many  cultural  contexts,  not  just  in  the  West.  Westerners  would
regard them as evidence of emotional disturbance. The English word
emotion is often used to refer to thought material activated by coordi-
nation  and  priority  problems;  and  these  utterances  would  represent
evidence of a startling breakdown of normal coordination of goals. As
discussed with the examples of “angry at sister” and “in love” in the
last chapter, emotions often entail sweeping orientations of goal net-
works, built up over time, as a consequence of hundreds of actions, and
cannot be evaluated or rebuilt on short notice. Such orientations, when
they come before attention activated by a sudden development in the
environment,  do  often  seem  to  be  involuntary.  At  the  same  time,
without  them,  it  would  be  absurd  to  talk  of  doing  anything  “volun-
tarily”; emotions are a kind of precondition of volition and motivation;
they convey the weight of hundreds of past volitions and motivations
into the present. Speciﬁc activities almost always represent combina-
tions and compromises among many goals.

The preparation of a meal, for example, may involve consideration
of  goals  with  reference  to  relationships,  nutrition,  time  usage,
“esthetic” or taste expectations, religious observances or prohibitions,
monetary  expenditure,  usage  of  available  perishables  or  seasonal
foods.  The  particular  can  only  be  apprehended  as  an  intersection  of
innumerable  properties  that  can  be  variously  categorized,  each  of
which may call up its own goal or set of goals. Here is where strict logic
leaves  one  most  at  sea,  either  in  deciding  what  to  do  or  in  under-
standing how others have combined such factors in a decision. This is
the original domain of personality psychology or of cultural interpre-
tation,  when  these  are  conceived  as  the  study  of  “nonscientiﬁc”  or
“nonrational” dimensions of behavior. Scientiﬁc experiment represents
an attempt to eliminate multiple determinations, so that “causes” may
be isolated. For this very reason, scientiﬁc method has run up against
a brick wall when it has attempted to explore this dimension of human
behavior. No one chooses recipes for dinner, or accords their political
allegiance, on the basis of a single “cause.” There is no unidimensional

Emotional Liberty

121

way to decide what to make for dinner, or what to wear, or what to say
next. Human behavior is, in this sense, “overdetermined.”

The  constant  activation  of  thought  material  associated  with  the
complex tasks of goal coordination – emotion as deﬁned here – comes
up, inevitably, as an issue in its own right, about which special goals
must  be  formulated.  In  the  simplest  case,  activated  thought  material
signals the existence of a goal conﬂict that cannot be resolved except
by rejection outright of one of the goals. A soldier, about to kill his ﬁrst
opponent on the ﬁeld of battle, feels a sudden, cold fear as a wave of
guilt and revulsion threatens to paralyze him. The goal of nonviolence
and the goal of soldiering are in conﬂict, conﬂict of a kind that can be
resolved only by setting one aside. If nonviolence is set aside, mental
control  will  be  marshaled  to  eliminate  it  from  attention,  so  that  the
complex  activities  of  soldiering  may  continue  without  interference.
Mental control of this kind derives from a sense of self. The self must
become an object of “cognition,” and must also be viewed as a terrain
of action in which there is something at stake. The vast range of acti-
vated thought material which calls for attention to provide guidance
for goal coordination suddenly comes before attention as a source of
danger. These activations must somehow be trimmed and reordered.
Emotives  are  one  instrument  for  attempting  such  trimming  and
reordering. But, because they have exploratory as well as self-altering
effects, they do not always represent compliant tools of mental control.
They may as easily, inadvertently, activate material that is capable of
subverting the mental-control goals they are formulated to serve, and
they may also heighten what Wegner and Smart (1997) call “deep acti-
vation.”  To  maintain  equilibrium  by  use  of  such  utterances  requires
experience; their effects are idiosyncratic and difﬁcult to predict, and
also vital to the social identity of the speaker. Even to know what kind
of “equilibrium” one might wish to maintain may take some search-
ing, some choosing among available models or norms. Hence the sense,
quite  widespread  in  the  world’s  communities  as  reported  in  ethno-
graphic  work  on  emotions,  that  emotional  control  requires  constant
effort  and  that  those  who  do  it  well  are  relatively  rare,  deserving  of
admiration and authority. A normative style of emotional management
is  a  fundamental  element  of  every  political  regime,  of  every  cultural
hegemony. Leaders must display mastery of this style; those who fail
to conform may be marginalized or severely sanctioned. In other cases,
there may be a hierarchy of contrasting styles, failure to conform to one
or another renders one’s identity unclear, subject to exclusion.

122

Part I. What Are Emotions?

But  the  political  implications  of  such  normative  styles  cannot  be
appreciated  unless  it  is  recognized  that  “management”  is  an  inade-
quate  metaphor  for  encompassing  everything  that  emotives  do.  This
term has been used by both Hochschild (1983) and Wikan (1989, 1990)
to name the use of emotional expression as a tool for altering emotions,
in  a  way  that  brings  both  researchers  very  close  to  the  concept  of 
emotives being proposed here. But to “manage” is to organize means
to  a  certain  known  end  or  goal.  Emotional  management  styles  are 
organized around normative goals. However, emotives are both self-
exploring  and  self-altering.  It  is  never  certain  what  effect  they  will
have. Unexpected effects are sometimes costly. (Edmund Muskie, for
example, was forced to drop out of a U.S. presidential primary race in
1972 because, trying to express anger, late one night, he began crying
on television.) The complex thought activations that are emotions often
tend toward changes in goals or ideals, often expose tension or conﬂict
among  them.  As  a  result,  management  can  easily  break  down;  or  a
given set of management strategies can be put to new uses. The self
that  is  managing,  and  its  intention  to  manage,  are  always  subject  to
revision.  “Navigation”  might  be  a  better  metaphor  than  “manage-
ment,” for what emotives accomplish, because navigation includes the
possibility of radically changing course, as well as that of making con-
stant corrections in order to stay on a chosen course. But even “navi-
gation”  implies  purposive  action,  whereas  changes  of  goals  are  only
purposive if they are carried out in the name of higher-priority goals.
Goal changes at the highest level of priority cannot be “intentionally”
carried out; they have no goal. Such changes reﬂect complex reorder-
ings  of  the  many-to-many  mappings  of  goal  networks.  They  are  the
result, often, of unexpected self-altering effects of emotive utterances
or  of  emotional  activations.  “Navigation”  is  used  here  to  refer  to  a
broad  array  of  emotional  changes,  including  high-level  goal  shifts.
“Navigation”  thus  encompasses  “management,”  which  is  the  use  of
emotives’ self-altering effects, in the name of a ﬁxed set of goals.

EMOTIONS AND POLITICAL REGIMES

Emotional Liberty, Emotional Suffering, Emotional Effort
The idea of navigation as a universal, central characteristic of emo-
tional  life  makes  possible  a  preliminary  deﬁnition  of  “emotional
liberty”  as  the  freedom  to  change  goals  in  response  to  bewildering,
ambivalent  thought  activations  that  exceed  the  capacity  of  attention

Emotional Liberty

123

and challenge the reign of high-level goals currently guiding emotional
management.  This  is  freedom,  not  to  make  rational  choices,  but  to
undergo  conversion  experiences  and  life-course  changes  involving
numerous contrasting, often incommensurable factors.

The idea that emotives make possible navigation – in which the self
both  undergoes  changes  of  goals  and  seeks  to  maintain  consistency
around the pursuit of certain goals – allows for a politically relevant
deﬁnition of “suffering.” It is one thing to suffer from pneumonia or
cancer. It is quite another to suffer while concealing information under
torture.1 The  suffering  of  such  torture  is  precisely  the  suffering  that
results when high-priority goals come into conﬂict. Torture to extract
information or confession presumes that preservation of one’s health,
wholeness, and freedom from pain is a high-priority goal. In situations
of political conﬂict, opponents may artiﬁcially bring this goal of health
and wholeness into conﬂict with another goal or set of goals that the
individual previously held as quite compatible with health and whole-
ness,  such  as  the  honor  of  one’s  family,  clan,  or  party,  or  the  moral
integrity of one’s commitments, or the health and wholeness of com-
rades. Whether the individual resists the torturers or gives in, he or she
will experience emotional suffering either way.

Suffering  that  results  from  goal  conﬂicts  is  seen  also  in  love  rela-
tionships when, for example, the desire to be with the loved one or to
engage in sexual acts with the loved one comes into conﬂict with the
desire to further the loved one’s own goals. This happens most obvi-
ously when the loved one makes clear a desire to avoid the lover or be
free of the relationship. Suffering results not only from the thought that
one  is  unworthy  of  the  loved  one,  but  also,  and  especially,  from  the
conﬂict  of  goals.  When  and  in  what  ways  ought  one  to  seek  out  the
loved one in order to bring about a change of heart? When and in what
ways  ought  one  to  accept  the  loved  one’s  expressed  aversion  for
oneself?  Emotional  suffering  occurs  when  high-priority  goals  are  in
conﬂict in this way, and when all available choices seem to counter one
or more high-priority goals. Seeking out a loved one may realize a high-
priority  desire  to  be  with  that  person,  but  it  may  also  expose  one  to
open rejection – and thus to the knowledge one has not embraced the
loved  one’s  own  goals  –  as  well  as  to  puzzles  involved  in  valuing
highly someone who does not reciprocate. Revealing a truth to a tor-
turer  may  end  the  physical  pain  but  require  the  sacriﬁce  of  a  moral 
or  political  ideal.  Resisting  the  torturer  seems  to  implicate  one  in 

1 Torture to gain information is a speciﬁc kind of torture; see Asad (1997); Caron (1999).

124

Part I. What Are Emotions?

self-harm.  Torture  victims  thus  continue  to  suffer  emotionally  long
after the physical pains have ended.

Spousal abuse, a matter of international concern in recent years, is
one of many violent relationships where the victim is often, to some
extent, willing. The victim holds the abusive goals of the partner higher
than his or her own goal of personal health and wholeness. But resolv-
ing  the  goal  conﬂict  this  way,  by  the  effort  of  holding  the  abusive
spouse’s  goals  above  health  and  wholeness  –  it  is  widely  believed  –
involves acute suffering, in the sense that I am using the term: Either
the  victim  believes  the  violence  is  justiﬁed,  holding  the  self  in  con-
tempt, or else he or she constantly undergoes conﬂict between the goals
of embracing a loved one’s goal and pursuing one’s own health and
wholeness. Holding the self in contempt is an automatic source of goal
conﬂict and therefore suffering, just because the more highly the self
prizes a goal, the more that goal comes in danger of taint from the con-
tempt aimed at the self who prizes.

Deﬁning emotional suffering as an acute form of goal conﬂict makes
it possible to elaborate on the concept of emotional effort proposed in
Chapter  3,  in  the  section  entitled  “Translation,  activation,  and  atten-
tion.”  Physical  effort  is  the  maintaining  of  an  action  or  exertion  in 
spite  of  rising  pain  or  loss  of  strength  in  skeletal  musculature.  The
metaphor  of  “emotional  effort,”  as  it  will  be  used  here,  refers  to  the
maintaining of a goal or action plan in spite of rising suffering due to
goal conﬂict. Athletic effort almost always involves a combination of
physical and emotional effort. The emotional effort consists of main-
taining the goal of skillful performance against conﬂicting desires for
physical comfort and enjoyment or freedom to pursue other activities.
Emotional suffering and emotional freedom, when so deﬁned, are
not opposites; a state of emotional freedom would not be one devoid
of  suffering,  nor  require  no  effort  to  sustain.  Emotional  suffering,  as
elaborated  here,  is  likely  to  accompany  any  important  shifts  in  life
goals, both in a preliminary stage, before the shift is embraced, and in
a “working-through” stage, where the suffering may be supplanted by
grief or may take the form of guilt or shame.

Induced Goal Conﬂict
Central to the life of individuals, open to deep social inﬂuence, emo-
tions  are  of  the  highest  political  signiﬁcance. Any  enduring  political
regime  must  establish  as  an  essential  element  a  normative  order  for
emotions,  an  “emotional  regime.”  Such  emotional  regimes  can  be

Emotional Liberty

125

placed, in a preliminary way, on a spectrum. At one extreme are strict
regimes which require individuals to express normative emotions and
to avoid deviant emotions. In these regimes, a limited number of emo-
tives are modeled through ceremony or ofﬁcial art forms. Individuals
are  required  to  utter  these  emotives  in  appropriate  circumstances,  in
the expectation that normative emotions will be enhanced and habitu-
ated. Those who refuse to make the normative utterances (whether of
respect for a father, love for a god or a king, or loyalty to an army) are
faced  with  the  prospect  of  severe  penalties.  Those  who  make  the
required utterances and gestures, but for whom the appropriate emo-
tions are not enhanced or habituated, may seek to conceal their lack of
zeal.  If  they  are  unsuccessful,  they,  too,  face  penalties.  The  penalties
may come in the form of torture, aimed at extracting a change through
induced goal conﬂict, or in the form of simple violence, conﬁnement,
deprivation,  exile.  Either  way,  the  prospect  of  such  penalties 
induces goal conﬂict not just in their present victims but in all those
who do not react within the normative range to the emotive utterances
required  by  the  regime.  Such  goal  conﬂict,  for  many,  signiﬁcantly
increases  the  likelihood  that  required  emotives  will  have  the  appro-
priate effect. The prospect of severe penalties, because of the goal con-
ﬂict  it  induces  whenever  deviant  emotions  occur,  renders  the 
emotional enhancement effects of normative emotives soothing, even
pleasurable. Many will ﬁnd that the strict emotional discipline of their
regime  works  well  for  them,  shoring  up  a  personal  emotional  man-
agement  style  that  serves  as  the  core  of  a  coherent,  rewarding  way 
of life.

At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  are  regimes  that  use  such  strict
emotional discipline only in certain institutions (armies, schools, priest-
hoods) or only at certain times of the year or certain stages of the life
cycle.  These  regimes  set  few  limits  on  emotional  navigation  outside
these restricted domains. In them, many individuals, operating without
the management tools of induced goal conﬂicts, encounter difﬁculties
coordinating their goals or holding to a single course over time. Rather
than  promoting  a  core  of  conformists  and  a  marginalized  minority,
such  a  regime  may  serve  as  an  umbrella  for  a  variety  of  emotional
styles. Some individual life paths will stray across two or more of these
varieties; others will cling faithfully to the one most familiar from birth.
Subgroups may form (cults, maﬁas) on the basis of shared preferences
for certain stronger penalties (verbal abuse, torture, death) that shore
up their emotional management more ﬁrmly than those offered by the

126

Part I. What Are Emotions?

prevailing  regime.  These  must  be  combated,  however,  because  they
threaten to reshape the existing regime in their own image.

Thus,  very  roughly,  one  might  generalize  that  strict  regimes  offer
strong emotional management tools at the expense of allowing greater
scope  for  self-exploration  and  navigation.  Loose  regimes  allow  for 
navigation and allow diverse sets of management tools to be fashioned
locally,  individually,  or  through  robust  subgroup  formation.  Why
should  we  favor  one  type  of  regime  over  another? Against  the  strict
regimes, two points may be made: (1) They achieve their stability by
inducing  goal  conﬂict  and  inﬂicting  intense  emotional  suffering  on
those who do not respond well to the normative emotives. (2) When
such  regimes  pronounce  anathemas  on  all  deviation,  they  set  them-
selves  against  an  important  human  possibility  –  or  vulnerability,  the
vulnerability to shifting purposes or goals, to conversion experiences,
crisis,  doubt.  Possibility,  vulnerability  –  the  pairing  of  these  terms  is
signiﬁcant. The higher the level at which goal shifting occurs, the less
the element of intention or choice enters into the change, because the
notions of intention or choice imply a preexisting goal or aim – a notion
of self, a long-term plan – in terms of which the shift is chosen. The
highest level determination of goals must occur, by deﬁnition, “for no
reason.” It is here, at the highest level, that multivocal thought activa-
tions  may  impinge  upon  the  arrangement  of  those  goals  that  steer
attention.  When  change  comes  here  –  where  certain  goals  may  have
long resided without ever coming before attention as objects of reﬂec-
tion – the individual has no sense of anticipating or “choosing.” Strict
regimes exploit the power of emotives to shape emotions, to serve as
management  tools,  but  ignore  or  denounce  the  power  of  emotional 
activations  to  “impose”  unanticipated  or  “unwanted”  change  on  the
individual. They thus offer, in the end, an incomplete and contradic-
tory vision of human nature and human possibilities. In the short run,
as institutions cope with war, epidemic, famine, scarcity, or the harsh
labor requirements of certain technologies and certain environments,
the induced suffering a regime depends on and the incompleteness of
its notion of humanity may have little importance. In the very long run,
they are of the greatest importance. They become particularly salient
in  situations  of  conquest,  colonization,  or  expansion,  when  the  nor-
mative  management  strategy  must  be  imposed  on  new  populations.
Emotional suffering becomes epidemic.

When it comes time to say what we stand for and what we oppose,
the  incompleteness  and  contradictory  character  of  the  strict  regime’s

Emotional Liberty

127

notion  of  humanity  represents  a  political  failure  that  can  only  be
rejected. This incompleteness coincides with a higher incidence of emo-
tional suffering than would prevail under a loose regime. It is the con-
junction of an incomplete or contradictory vision of humanity and of
induced suffering aimed at sustaining allegiance to such incomplete-
ness that renders certain regimes unjust.

But what forms of induced emotional suffering are allowable under
a  regime  of  emotional  freedom?  This  is  a  familiar  problem  in  all 
deﬁnitions of political liberty – spelling out what limits on liberty are
acceptable in the interest of liberty – but an answer must be offered, in
any case. One answer is to pronounce as allowable and necessary the
inducing  of  emotional  suffering,  through  penalties,  in  all  those  who
espouse induced emotional suffering as a means to any end other than
the maintenance of emotional freedom. This is an answer compatible
with the liberal tradition and with the notion of the rule of law. Another
answer is to assert that one cannot force people to be free; one cannot,
by  means  of  induced  emotional  suffering,  bring  people  to  forswear
induced emotional suffering as a tool, as an instrument of rule or of
community. In the short run it is not necessary to decide between them.
Both answers are compatible with a political stance in favor of reduc-
ing  induced  suffering  to  a  minimum  –  a  stance  that  would  motivate
critical judgments of all existing polities.

The ideal of reducing emotional suffering to the necessary minimum
has implications for political action as well as for political judgment.
Political  action  against  undue  use  of  induced  emotional  suffering
cannot  be  effective  if  such  action  itself  makes  undue  use  of  induced
emotional suffering in order to win compliance with its aims. Fighting
ﬁre with ﬁre may only perpetuate the ills one seeks to end. (This point
is illustrated vividly in the case of the French Revolution, discussed in
Part II.)

Of  course,  this  schematism  encounters  problems  as  soon  as  it  is
applied  to  a  real  social  order.  Capitalist  democracies,  for  example,
appear to offer great scope for navigation, but, in practice, capacities
and options are limited by contractual relationships (that is, by access
to  money  and  property).  Those  who  depend  on  a  single  contractual
relationship for their income and social identity (married women under
certain  legal  regimes,  salaried  employees)  are,  in  practice,  severely
limited  in  the  types  of  emotional  management  strategies  they  may
adopt – even though these strategies vary widely from one enterprise
or  household  to  another.  Within  families,  beyond  the  reach  of  legal

128

Part I. What Are Emotions?

action,  still  other  types  of  strategies  may  be  common.  (See,  on  these
issues,  Reddy  1987,  1997a).  Such  societies  thus  belong  more  to  the
middle  of  the  spectrum  and  produce  all  sorts  of  conﬁgurations: 
conforming majorities, marginalized minorities, varying management
strategies  within  the  majority,  organized  cults  and  maﬁas.  A large
industrial society offers the prospect of many different social relation-
ships  and  emotional  management  styles,  the  rich  and  well  educated
uniting around one, the laboring poor being subjected to a variety of
others. Gender-based and ethnic variation are usually also marked and
exploited to sustain a complex and inequitable division of labor. Vital,
large-scale  exchange  of  money  and  goods,  rather  than  serving  as  a 
unifying  factor,  can  harden  and  consolidate  stark  differences.  Adult
male coal miners, women garment workers in a sweatshop, or ﬂight
attendants  have  very  different  social  relationships  and  live  in  very 
different  emotional  atmospheres,  whereas 
the  executives  who
command them have much more in common.

In practice, such complex social orders can also offer individuals the
opportunity  to  create  relationships  or  localized  organizations  that
provide  them  with  emotional  refuge.  In  these  contexts  norms  are
relaxed or even reversed; mental control efforts may be temporarily set
aside. Affective connections, otherwise illicit, may be established, even
celebrated. Such emotional refuges may take a great variety of forms,
from private understandings, to informal sociability, to Carnival-type
ritual, to international secret brotherhoods. They probably play a role
in most emotional regimes. Their signiﬁcance is polyvalent. They may
make the current order more livable for some people, some of the time.
For others, or in other times, they may provide a place from which con-
testation, conﬂict, and transformation are launched.

The  theory  being  elaborated  here  has,  by  this  time,  given  rise  to 
a  series  of  special  deﬁnitions  of  terms  that  it  would  be  convenient 
to list.

emotions. Goal-relevant  activations  of 

that 
exceed  the  translating  capacity  of  attention  within  a  short  time
horizon.

thought  material 

emotives. A type of speech act different from both performative and
constative utterances, which both describes (like constative utter-
ances) and changes (like performatives) the world, because emo-
tional expression has an exploratory and a self-altering effect on
the activated thought material of emotion.

Emotional Liberty

129

emotional management. Instrumental use of the self-altering effects of
emotives  in  the  service  of  a  goal.  May  be  subverted  by  the
exploratory effects of emotives.

emotional  navigation. The  fundamental  character  of  emotional  life.
Emotions are a sphere of “fugitive instrumentalism,” in which the
exploratory and self-altering effects of emotives sometimes work
in  tandem,  cooperatively,  under  the  guidance  of  certain  high-
priority  goals  and,  in  other  instances,  part  ways,  such  that  the
individual  may  either  sink  into  “self-deception”  or  undergo  a
“conversion experience.”

emotional liberty. The freedom to change goals in response to bewil-
dering, ambivalent thought activations that exceed the capacity of
attention  and  challenge  the  reign  of  high-level  goals  currently
guiding  emotional  management.  This  is  freedom,  not  to  make
rational choices, but to undergo or derail conversion experiences
and  life-course  changes  involving  numerous  contrasting  incom-
mensurable factors.

emotional  suffering. An  acute  form  of  goal  conﬂict,  especially  that
brought on by emotional thought activations. Political torture and
unrequited  love  (both  in  the  Western  context)  are  examples  of
emotional suffering.

emotional effort. Maintaining a goal or action plan in spite of rising

suffering due to goal conﬂict.

emotional  regime. The  set  of  normative  emotions  and  the  ofﬁcial
rituals, practices, and emotives that express and inculcate them; a
necessary underpinning of any stable political regime.

induced goal conﬂict. The effects at a distance (that is, the deterrent or
exemplary effects) of policies of punishment, torture, exclusion, or
imprisonment  which  sanction  deviance  from  an  emotional
regime.

emotional  refuge.  A relationship,  ritual,  or  organization  (whether
informal  or  formal)  that  provides  safe  release  from  prevailing
emotional norms and allows relaxation of emotional effort, with
or  without  an  ideological  justiﬁcation,  which  may  shore  up  or
threaten the existing emotional regime.

This set of interlinked concepts is sufﬁcient to allow historical analysis
that is at once ethnographically rich, sensitive to deviance and diver-
sity,  and  politically  engaged.  The  idea  is  not  to  apply  these  terms
mechanically to a given body of evidence, but to hold them ready in

130

Part I. What Are Emotions?

the background. They can provide points of reference that guide our
interpretive endeavor beyond relativism, toward a defensible commit-
ment to liberty.

POLITICAL EVALUATION OF CASE MATERIAL

This array of concepts frees one of the necessity of theorizing culture,
power,  or  identity  characteristics,  such  as  race,  class,  gender,  or 
ethnicity, which have preoccupied scholars so much of late. The only
questions that need to be asked are, Who suffers? Is the suffering an
unavoidable consequence of emotional navigation or does this suffer-
ing help to shore up a restrictive emotional regime? That is, is this suf-
fering a tragedy or an injustice? In developing speciﬁc answers to these
questions, identities, the cultural ﬁeld, and political institutions come
back into play as historical phenomena, but not as independent theo-
retical entities. We seek conceptualizations of these things that will best
allow  us  to  grasp  emotional  suffering.  In  Part  II  of  this  study,  I  will
examine historical material on France for the period 1700 to 1850. An
appreciation of one episode of emotional history will breathe life into
the theoretical language we have just explored. By way of conclusion
for  this  chapter’s  analysis,  however,  I  wish  to  show  brieﬂy  how  the
above  schema  can  be  immediately  put  to  use  evaluating  individual
instances  of  conﬂict  and  deviance.  To  do  so  I  turn  to  two  cases  of
arranged  marriage,  one  from  nineteenth-century  France,  one  that  of
Rash¯ıd  and  F¯ayga,  derived  from  Abu-Lughod’s  (1986)  study  of  the
Awlad (cid:2)Ali, already discussed in Chapter 2.

In  1840,  in  the  village  of  Meudon,  about  two  miles  southwest  of
Paris, a marriage was arranged between Palmyre Désirée Picard and
Nicolas Marie Gogue.2 The bride’s mother owned a small vineyard and
sold  wine  out  of  her  home,  both  for  resale  and  for  immediate  con-
sumption. The groom’s family also owned vineyards in the neighbor-
ing village of Clamart. The day after the wedding, the husband began
complaining  loudly  to  whoever  would  listen  that  his  new  wife  was 
two  months’  pregnant  by  another  man.  “I  thought  I  was  entering  a

2 The material on the Gogue case is derived from the Tribunal civil de Versailles, in the
Archives  de  l’ancien  département  de  Seine-et-Oise,  in  two  different  series:  (1)  3U 
Registre d’audiences et de jugements civils, 1e chambre, 1839, 1840, judgments of 15
November 1839, 31 March 1840, 19 May 1840, 25 November 1840; (2) 3U 024648, Enquête
of 26 June 1840, Contr’enquête of 1 July 1840.

Emotional Liberty

131

garden full of ﬂowers,” he repeated to at least two of his new in-laws,
“but I was entering a desert.” The husband’s father thought that the
trouble began when Gogue saw how his new wife behaved toward a
certain  Guillaume  during  the  wedding  party.  This  Guillaume  had
worked  for  Mme  Picard  and  was  also  a  frequent  customer  in  her
wineshop. But, whatever cause Gogue may have had, his statements
constituted public insult, a matter recognized in law as one of the few
legitimate grounds (including cruelty and violence) for marital sepa-
ration. (Divorce was not possible at that time.) Soon there was word of
violence  occurring  in  the  new  household.  The  whole  village  knew
within days that the couple were “not getting on together” (“ne fait pas
bon ménage ensemble”). Palmyre began sleeping separately from her
husband. About three months after the marriage Gogue attacked his
wife more severely than usual, dragging her from her bed by her hair,
beating her, then attempting to strangle her. Her cries brought several
neighbors into their bedroom; soon the village police ofﬁcer (commis-
saire de police) arrived. Witnesses reported marks on her leg and on her
neck. Palmyre moved back to her mother’s the next day and sued for
a separation. The evidence of strangulation, seen by several villagers,
coupled  with  the  public  insults  made  the  wife’s  case  quite  strong;  a 
separation was granted later in the year.

In his deposition, the police agent noted that the husband’s violence
was  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  the  woman  was  visibly  pregnant.
Although none of the other thirteen witnesses – including the mother
of the wife and the father of the husband – had mentioned the preg-
nancy, this comment suggests Gogue was right, that his new wife was
pregnant at the wedding. According to the wife’s brother, their ﬁghts
had begun on their wedding night, hardly leaving time for an inter-
lude of intimacy. Right or wrong in his charges against his wife, Gogue
had been severely scolded three days after the marriage by his father,
who  told  him  to  “hold  his  tongue”  and  beg  pardon  from  his  wife 
and  mother-in-law.  Gogue  went  to  his  wife  and  fell  to  his  knees, 
in  tears,  asking  to  be  forgiven.  His  wife  accepted  the  apology.  But 
within  a  few  days,  Gogue  could  not  contain  himself  and  began
denouncing  her  again.  The  father  reproached  Mme  Picard  for  con-
tinuing to receive Guillaume in her wineshop after the wedding, which
only exasperated his son further. “He was no longer in possession of
all his faculties,” Gogue’s father maintained; “if only his mother-in-law
and his wife had taken a few precautions, they could have brought him
to reason.”

132

Part I. What Are Emotions?

None of the fourteen witnesses in the case suggested the young wife
had done anything wrong – to have done so under oath would have
constituted  public  insult  in  itself  –  but  the  protestations  about  her
virtue were few and vague. The unspoken assumption of all, includ-
ing Gogue’s father and uncle, appeared to be that the truth of the matter
was irrelevant. Gogue must protect his wife’s reputation, even if un-
deserved,  thereby  protecting  his  own.  He  must  make  the  best  of  the 
situation.  Gogue’s  father  and  uncle  were  nonetheless  angry  that  his
wife had persisted in her suit for separation; she, too, ought to devote
herself to damage control and give her husband another chance. They
blamed her mother for convincing her otherwise.

Central to the case, then, was Gogue’s tendency to work himself into
a state of heightened jealousy, grief, and rage with emotives so strik-
ing witnesses repeated them: “I thought I was entering a garden full of
ﬂowers, but I was entering a desert.” “If you were not pregnant,” he
said to his wife on one occasion, “I would kill you.” This strategy went
against  the  norms  of  the  community.  Even  his  own  family  acknowl-
edged he was in the wrong.

An  historicist,  or  constructionist,  approach  to  this  episode  would
emphasize the distinct character and strength of the code of honor that
ruled  in  this  society,  a  code  that  allowed  for  a  great  deal  of  deviant
behavior, so long as it was accomplished discreetly, a code that dictated
the strongest family solidarity around matters of reputation. Since we
do not live by such a code, the constructionist would insist, we are not
in a position to make moral or political judgments about the choices
made by these people.

The concept of emotives allows one, in contrast, to appreciate that
this  honor  code  dictated  behaviors,  and  silences,  that  could  have  a
strong shaping impact on one’s emotions. Far from being a mere cul-
tural  construct  or  discourse,  this  code  was  an  essential  part  of  an 
emotional regime and favored a certain style of emotion management.
From this perspective the actions of Gogue’s elders take on a fascinat-
ing new signiﬁcance. They urged him to express satisfaction with, and
affection  for,  his  pregnant  wife  and  commitment  to  her  child.  They 
prescribed emotives for him. They believed that if he worked at such
expressions he could master his jealousy and disappointment, save the
marriage, and enjoy many possibilities that were closed off by a legal
separation.  He  could  have  established  a  tolerant  closeness  with  his
wife, or at least a de facto estrangement, that would have minimized
gossip  and  family  dishonor  and  allowed  for  the  possibility  of  legiti-

Emotional Liberty

133

mate offspring. Gogue’s father believed that Mme Picard could have
helped Gogue regain emotional equilibrium if she had closed her door
to Guillaume, whose continuing visits to her house he believed only
stimulated  Gogue’s  suspicions.  These  were  strategies  of  emotional
management,  and  no  interpretation  of  this  episode  can  be  complete
that does not recognize their centrality.

In some respects the emotional regime Gogue was told to submit to
was very rigid, in others, quite loose. (This regime will be considered
in greater detail in Chapters 7 and 8.) As far as certain public behav-
iors  and  nonverbal  cues  were  concerned,  strict  self-control  was
required.  A duel  might  result  from  an  eyebrow  raised  at  the  wrong
moment  (Nye  1993;  Reddy  1997b).  Those  who  gained  mastery  of 
themselves,  and  of  the  game  of  appearances  demanded  by  honor,
however,  could  entertain  many  choices  about  how  one  actually  led
one’s  life.  The  family  members  who  scolded  Gogue  knew  that  there
were  many  ways,  besides  marriage,  to  ﬁnd  one’s  “garden  full  of
ﬂowers,” and many ways to ﬁnd it even in marriage, so long as one’s
ideas about it were not too ﬁxed. At the same time, the very silences
enforced by the honor code could encourage false expectations, espe-
cially among the young, among those who tended to mistake appear-
ances  for  realities  or  who,  for  whatever  reason,  could  not  tolerate
compromise.

Where the honor code dictated silence, it was impossible to enunci-
ate explicit public norms. Young Gogue may have been entirely unpre-
pared for the ideas that his father, his uncle, and his new mother-in-law
tried to communicate to him urgently in the days after his marriage. If
he had heard of men whose wives were unfaithful, it was in the form
of gossip, or in newspapers, novels, or plays – that is, in contexts that
encouraged  judgment  and  distancing.3 The  extent  to  which  a  man
ought to tolerate in silence a wife’s infractions was, in any case, a highly
personal  matter.  Precisely  because  norms  could  not  be  enunciated
openly, each person had to ﬁnd his or her own way. Gogue was appar-
ently  thrown  into  prolonged  turmoil  by  the  discovery  of  his  wife’s
pregnancy. It appears that he tried to reconcile with her after an initial
outburst, but subsequently found he was unable to contain his shame
and anger. To be happily married was a high-priority goal for him. But

3 For further discussion of public norms and the circulation and inﬂuence of newspapers,
novels, and plays, see the discussion in Chapter 7; see also Lyons (1987); Reddy (1993);
Nye (1993); Cornut-Gentille (1996); Houbre (1997).

134

Part I. What Are Emotions?

in  a  society  where  divorce  was  ruled  out,  one  false  step  might  put
Gogue’s goal out of reach. At ﬁrst he sought to repair the situation in
line with his father’s advice. But the emotives his father wisely coun-
selled  him  to  utter  (apologizing  to  wife  and  mother-in-law)  did  not
have the desired effect. His management effort failed, and he chose, in
the end, a different path. Violence against his wife was not apparently
aimed at compelling her to take a given course of action. Instead it was
simply a way to impose on her emotional suffering that matched the
suffering he believed she had knowingly imposed on him. If scandal
followed, scandal was what she deserved.

An honor code of this type combines ﬂexibility and rigidity. Severe
penalties await those who openly break its injunctions. Public oppro-
brium,  gossip,  disgrace  of  deviants  such  as  Gogue  and  his  wife  (for
both  diverged  from  the  norm)  induce  powerful  goal  conﬂict  in  a
broader  audience.  But,  so  long  as  one  remains  adept  at  keeping  up
appearances,  one  can  navigate  one’s  way  to  many  personal  compro-
mises. Court records of the period reveal many peculiar arrangements:
husbands and wives who lived apart for years, still others who spent
a few days a month together, others who married for reasons that had
little to do with sexuality. The vast majority of such arrangements were
kept silent, however, were known only to a few, and left no trace in the
records. In the cases that found their way into the courts, something
went wrong; one of the parties violated implicit understandings or had
an  unexpected  change  of  heart  (Reddy  1993,  1997b).  In  all  cases  the
man’s preferences were crucial; he could legally force his wife to live
with him; her inﬁdelities were illegal and punishable by imprisonment
if  he  chose  to  lodge  a  formal  complaint.  His  inﬁdelities,  so  long  as
accomplished outside the home, were not illegal and even enjoyed a
certain tolerance.

In  her  important  study  of  emotion  among  the Awlad  (cid:2)Ali,  already
mentioned,  Abu-Lughod  (1986)  examines  an  unusually  difﬁcult 
marriage involving Rash¯ıd, a man in his early forties, and F¯ayga, his
second wife, who was twenty years his junior. As was noted in Chapter
2,  Rash¯ıd  showed  undue  preference  for  F¯ayga.  But  F¯ayga  felt  only
aversion  for  her  new,  middle-aged  husband;  when  she  ran  away,
Rash¯ıd did everything he could to get her back, angering many rela-
tives who felt her departure was an insult.

The ghinn¯awas F¯ayga recited to give expression to her (otherwise)
concealed feelings actually take the form of emotives. (This is true of
most of the ghinn¯awas reported in Abu-Lughod’s study.)

Emotional Liberty

135

You want, oh dear one, to be disappointed
and to ﬁght about something not fated to be . . .
On my breast I placed
a tombstone, though I was not dead, oh loved one . . .
If a new love match is not granted
the ache in my mind will continue, oh beloved . . .

(1986:217–219)

In Abu-Lughod’s view ghinn¯awas make possible the depiction of the
self as able to creatively master strong divergent feelings – an ability
that  played  a  central  role  in  the  ideal  of  honorable  independence  so
many Awlad (cid:2)Ali strove to achieve. The concept of emotives, however,
allows one to regard ghinn¯awas as powerful tools for shaping and dis-
ciplining emotional material that stands in tension with the emotional
regime’s prevailing norm of tough, honorable independence. They may
not always work as planned, however. Where many women used them
to express feelings they wished to master, F¯ayga, in the end, acted on
her deviant feelings by running away and later by openly showing her
aversion to spending nights with her new husband – very immature
behavior. The concept of emotives allows us (1) to accept as an impor-
tant  insight Abu-Lughod’s  insistence  that  ghinn¯awas  do  not  express
“real” or “genuine” feelings, and (2) to recognize that, nonetheless, they
are more than mere forms of self-fashioning, because they play a role
in  the  navigation  of  difﬁcult  seas.  They  may  serve  to  assure  or  to
demonstrate mastery, but their exploratory effects may as easily inten-
sify nonconformist sentiment.

The concept of emotives and the notion of navigation outlined above
suggest that any successful emotion regime must allow for wide per-
sonal variation. But also, the story of the Gogue marriage indicates the
high price exacted by regimes that accommodate variation by treating
it as a deviation that must be concealed, and that impose stricter expec-
tations on women than on men. The difﬁculties of navigation ought to
be openly recognized and allowed for, with equal treatment of all. The
articulate elaboration of alternatives and consequences – the freedom
to be open to shifts of high-priority goals – mitigates goal conﬂict and
its emotional suffering and aids navigation. The ease of navigation of
one’s  close  collaborators  (whatever  their  gender)  is  as  important  as
one’s own to the reduction of emotional suffering.

Where  honor  codes  allow  for  deviance  from  norms  through  con-
cealment, individuals often establish what we might call informal emo-

136

Part I. What Are Emotions?

tional  refuges.  At  a  minimum,  emotional  refuge  is  a  relationship  in
which one may display one’s deviant feelings openly, and sometimes
realize deviant desires as well. Arrangements of this sort were common
in  relations  between  men  and  women  in  early  nineteenth-century
France,  as  they  were  between  siblings  and  certain  close  friends  (see
Vincent-Buffault 1995; Houbre 1997; for further discussion, see Chap-
ters 7 and 8). Gogue’s father, for example, may be read as encouraging
his  son  to  tolerate  his  bride’s  extramarital  connection  so  long  as  she
took  care  to  conceal  it.  Marriage  based  on  love  was  by  this  time  a
widely accepted, but by no means universal, norm in France. Gogue
signaled  his  acceptance  of  this  norm  by  his  references  to  entering  a
garden.  The  norm  of  arranged  marriage  was  still  very  much  alive,
however;  and,  within  this  latter  standard,  ready  acceptance  of  extra-
marital relations (as in aristocratic marriages of the eighteenth century)
remained  a  possibility.  Had  Gogue  been  able  to  accept  such  a  line 
of conduct, his marriage might have become an emotional refuge in the
sense that both partners accepted the absence of love between them.
Each  would  be  then  able  to  pursue  additional  refuge  in  extramarital
relationships.  As  I  have  noted,  nothing  about  these  choices  was 
easy, 
standard.  Every  arrangement  was 
idiosyncratic.

straightforward,  or 

In the case of the Awlad (cid:2)Ali, Abu-Lughod notes the occurrence of a
very  different  kind  of  emotional  refuge,  namely,  the  development 
of  affectionate,  even  romantic,  feelings  between  spouses  who  were
expected  to  remain  distant,  emotionally  independent,  mutually
respectful,  devoted  to  their  separate  roles.  Here,  too,  such  arrange-
ments  were  idiosyncratic  and  depended  on  the  agreement  of  both
parties. Rash¯ıd’s difﬁculties may be seen as deriving from his failure
to secure such an agreement from his young bride, as much as from his
failure  to  remain  discreet  about  his  intentions.  In  another  case  dis-
cussed  by  Abu-Lughod,  a  divorced  woman  openly  displayed  her
longing for her ex-husband in front of dismayed friends; later, when
he returned to her, she displayed with equal indiscretion her consider-
able joy. The breach here was twofold: If she could not resist such feel-
ings, she should at least conceal them.

Where honor codes reign, concealment allows for all kinds of com-
promise,  a  rich  ﬁeld  for  improvisation  and  for  navigation  to  many
interesting shores and safe harbors. (This is, in effect, what is meant by
the  term  honor in  English  and  its  equivalent  in  French.) At  the  same
time, the individual is left very much to her own devices.

Emotional Liberty

137

In  the  marriages  of  Gogue  and  Picard  and  of  Rash¯ıd  and  F¯ayga,
young women with hardly any experience of the world were thrust by
parental authority into long-term sexual submission to men they knew
nothing of. In both cases the norm for marriage was that of loyal coop-
eration, hard work, production of offspring, and wifely submission to
the husband’s authority. In the French case, due to Christian teaching,
to  the  circulation  of  sentimental  novels,  and  the  popularity  of  innu-
merable  melodramas  and  songs,  marriage  also  included  an  ideal  of
romantic love that stood in strong tension with the norm of arranged
marriage.  In  the Awlad  (cid:2)Ali  case,  romantic  love  played  a  less  salient
role, as an outlawed alternative to marriage, but was still well known
through the plots of traditional poetry. In both cases, the result was a
very difﬁcult mix, in which the newly married were likely to face sig-
niﬁcant goal conﬂicts and emotional suffering. To be confronted with
such stark choices, to be presented with the tools of self-management
represented by the searing shame of public breach of the honor code,
or the all-or-nothing acceptance of a male partner of unknown charac-
ter – this is political oppression.

I am not arguing for a simple progressive view of history, in which
the  passing  of  the  centuries  leads  gradually  but  inevitably  toward  a
kinder, gentler social organization. Nor do I wish to condemn certain
non-Western ways, thereby potentially adding yet another burden of
shame,  another  insult,  to  lives  already  too  weighted  with  insult  and
fear  of  insult.  I  plead  only  for  recognition  of  two  things:  (1)  that  the
people involved in these episodes, even though they did not formulate
explicit political grievances, were struggling to ﬁnd a better way, or to
improvise a personal variation on prevailing norms; (2) that this strug-
gle, this navigation, is our own.

Armed with these two recognitions, it would be possible to write a
history of emotions that takes into account their full political signiﬁ-
cance. In such a history, the modern West would not play the role of
latest  and  best  approximation  of  perfection,  but  that  of  a  promising,
although variegated, failure of world-historical proportions, a failure
whose promise lies in its vast scope. A civilization, better than some
alternatives,  the  fruit  of  collective  striving,  but  off-course,  awaits  a
change of navigation.

