BOOK I

1

Every art and every inquiry, and similarly every action and pursuit, is
thought to aim at some good; and for this reason the good has rightly
been declared to be that at which all things aim. But a certain difference
is found among ends; some are activities, others are products apart from
the activities that produce them. Where there are ends apart from the
actions, it is the nature of the products to be better than the activities.
Now, as there are many actions, arts, and sciences, their ends also are
many; the end of the medical art is health, that of shipbuilding a vessel,
that of strategy victory, that of economics wealth. But where such arts
fall under a single capacity—as bridle-making and the other arts con-
cerned with the equipment of horses fall under the art of riding, and this
and every military action under strategy, in the same way other arts fall
under yet others—in all of these the ends of the master arts are to be
preferred to all the subordinate ends; for it is for the sake of the former
that the latter are pursued. It makes no difference whether the activities
themselves are the ends of the actions, or something else apart from the
activities, as in the case of the sciences just mentioned.

2

If, then, there is some end of the things we do, which we desire for its
own sake (everything else being desired for the sake of this), and if we
do not choose everything for the sake of something else (for at that rate
the process would go on to infinity, so that our desire would be empty
and vain), clearly this must be the good and the chief good. Will not the
knowledge of it, then, have a great influence on life? Shall we not, like

4/Aristotle
archers who have a mark to aim at, be more likely to hit upon what is
right? If so, we must try, in outline at least, to determine what it is, and
of which of the sciences or capacities it is the object. It would seem to
belong to the most authoritative art and that which is most truly the
master art. And politics appears to be of this nature; for it is this that
ordains which of the sciences should be studied in a state, and which
each class of citizens should learn and up to what point they should
learn them; and we see even the most highly esteemed of capacities to
fall under this, e.g., strategy, economics, rhetoric; now, since politics
uses the rest of the sciences, and since, again, it legislates as to what we
are to do and what we are to abstain from, the end of this science must
include those of the others, so that this end must be the good for man.
For even if the end is the same for a single man and for a state, that of
the state seems at all events something greater and more complete whether
to attain or to preserve; though it is worth while to attain the end merely
for one man, it is finer and more godlike to attain it for a nation or for
city-states. These, then, are the ends at which our inquiry aims, since it
is political science, in one sense of that term.

3

Our discussion will be adequate if it has as much clearness as the sub-
ject-matter admits of, for precision is not to be sought for alike in all
discussions, any more than in all the products of the crafts. Now fine
and just actions, which political science investigates, admit of much
variety and fluctuation of opinion, so that they may be thought to exist
only by convention, and not by nature. And goods also give rise to a
similar fluctuation because they bring harm to many people; for before
now men have been undone by reason of their wealth, and others by
reason of their courage. We must be content, then, in speaking of such
subjects and with such premisses to indicate the truth roughly and in
outline, and in speaking about things which are only for the most part
true and with premisses of the same kind to reach conclusions that are
no better. In the same spirit, therefore, should each type of statement be
received; for it is the mark of an educated man to look for precision in
each class of things just so far as the nature of the subject admits; it is
evidently equally foolish to accept probable reasoning from a mathema-
tician and to demand from a rhetorician scientific proofs.
Now each man judges well the things he knows, and of these he is a
good judge. And so the man who has been educated in a subject is a

Nicomachean Ethics/5

good judge of that subject, and the man who has received an all-round
education is a good judge in general. Hence a young man is not a proper
hearer of lectures on political science; for he is inexperienced in the
actions that occur in life, but its discussions start from these and are
about these; and, further, since he tends to follow his passions, his study
will be vain and unprofitable, because the end aimed at is not knowledge
but action. And it makes no difference whether he is young in years or
youthful in character; the defect does not depend on time, but on his
living, and pursuing each successive object, as passion directs. For to
such persons, as to the incontinent, knowledge brings no profit; but to
those who desire and act in accordance with a rational principle knowl-
edge about such matters will be of great benefit.
These remarks about the student, the sort of treatment to be ex-
pected, and the purpose of the inquiry, may be taken as our preface.

4

Let us resume our inquiry and state, in view of the fact that all knowl-
edge and every pursuit aims at some good, what it is that we say politi-
cal science aims at and what is the highest of all goods achievable by
action. Verbally there is very general agreement; for both the general
run of men and people of superior refinement say that it is happiness,
and identify living well and doing well with being happy; but with re-
gard to what happiness is they differ, and the many do not give the same
account as the wise. For the former think it is some plain and obvious
thing, like pleasure, wealth, or honour; they differ, however, from one
another—and often even the same man identifies it with different things,
with health when he is ill, with wealth when he is poor; but, conscious of
their ignorance, they admire those who proclaim some great ideal that is
above their comprehension. Now some thought that apart from these
many goods there is another which is self-subsistent and causes the good-
ness of all these as well. To examine all the opinions that have been held
were perhaps somewhat fruitless; enough to examine those that are most
prevalent or that seem to be arguable.
Let us not fail to notice, however, that there is a difference between
arguments from and those to the first principles. For Plato, too, was
right in raising this question and asking, as he used to do, ‘are we on the
way from or to the first principles?’ There is a difference, as there is in
a race-course between the course from the judges to the turning-point
and the way back. For, while we must begin with what is known, things

6/Aristotle
are objects of knowledge in two senses—some to us, some without quali-
fication. Presumably, then, we must begin with things known to us.
Hence any one who is to listen intelligently to lectures about what is
noble and just, and generally, about the subjects of political science
must have been brought up in good habits. For the fact is the starting-
point, and if this is sufficiently plain to him, he will not at the start need
the reason as well; and the man who has been well brought up has or can
easily get starting-points. And as for him who neither has nor can get
them, let him hear the words of Hesiod:

Far best is he who knows all things himself;
Good, he that hearkens when men counsel right;
But he who neither knows, nor lays to heart
Another’s wisdom, is a useless wight.

5

Let us, however, resume our discussion from the point at which we
digressed. To judge from the lives that men lead, most men, and men of
the most vulgar type, seem (not without some ground) to identify the
good, or happiness, with pleasure; which is the reason why they love the
life of enjoyment. For there are, we may say, three prominent types of
life—that just mentioned, the political, and thirdly the contemplative
life. Now the mass of mankind are evidently quite slavish in their tastes,
preferring a life suitable to beasts, but they get some ground for their
view from the fact that many of those in high places share the tastes of
Sardanapallus. A consideration of the prominent types of life shows
that people of superior refinement and of active disposition identify hap-
piness with honour; for this is, roughly speaking, the end of the political
life. But it seems too superficial to be what we are looking for, since it is
thought to depend on those who bestow honour rather than on him who
receives it, but the good we divine to be something proper to a man and
not easily taken from him. Further, men seem to pursue honour in order
that they may be assured of their goodness; at least it is by men of
practical wisdom that they seek to be honoured, and among those who
know them, and on the ground of their virtue; clearly, then, according to
them, at any rate, virtue is better. And perhaps one might even suppose
this to be, rather than honour, the end of the political life. But even this
appears somewhat incomplete; for possession of virtue seems actually
compatible with being asleep, or with lifelong inactivity, and, further,

Nicomachean Ethics/7

with the greatest sufferings and misfortunes; but a man who was living
so no one would call happy, unless he were maintaining a thesis at all
costs. But enough of this; for the subject has been sufficiently treated
even in the current discussions. Third comes the contemplative life, which
we shall consider later.
The life of money-making is one undertaken under compulsion, and
wealth is evidently not the good we are seeking; for it is merely useful
and for the sake of something else. And so one might rather take the
aforenamed objects to be ends; for they are loved for themselves. But it
is evident that not even these are ends; yet many arguments have been
thrown away in support of them. Let us leave this subject, then.

6

We had perhaps better consider the universal good and discuss thor-
oughly what is meant by it, although such an inquiry is made an uphill
one by the fact that the Forms have been introduced by friends of our
own. Yet it would perhaps be thought to be better, indeed to be our duty,
for the sake of maintaining the truth even to destroy what touches us
closely, especially as we are philosophers or lovers of wisdom; for, while
both are dear, piety requires us to honour truth above our friends.
The men who introduced this doctrine did not posit Ideas of classes
within which they recognized priority and posteriority (which is the rea-
son why they did not maintain the existence of an Idea embracing all
numbers); but the term ‘good’ is used both in the category of substance
and in that of quality and in that of relation, and that which is per se,
i.e., substance, is prior in nature to the relative (for the latter is like an
off shoot and accident of being); so that there could not be a common
Idea set over all these goods. Further, since ‘good’ has as many senses
as ‘being’ (for it is predicated both in the category of substance, as of
God and of reason, and in quality, i.e., of the virtues, and in quantity,
i.e., of that which is moderate, and in relation, i.e., of the useful, and in
time, i.e., of the right opportunity, and in place, i.e., of the right locality
and the like), clearly it cannot be something universally present in all
cases and single; for then it could not have been predicated in all the
categories but in one only. Further, since of the things answering to one
Idea there is one science, there would have been one science of all the
goods; but as it is there are many sciences even of the things that fall
under one category, e.g., of opportunity, for opportunity in war is stud-
ied by strategics and in disease by medicine, and the moderate in food is

8/Aristotle
studied by medicine and in exercise by the science of gymnastics. And
one might ask the question, what in the world they mean by ‘a thing
itself,’ is (as is the case) in ‘man himself’ and in a particular man the
account of man is one and the same. For in so far as they are man, they
will in no respect differ; and if this is so, neither will ‘good itself’ and
particular goods, in so far as they are good. But again it will not be good
any the more for being eternal, since that which lasts long is no whiter
than that which perishes in a day. The Pythagoreans seem to give a more
plausible account of the good, when they place the one in the column of
goods; and it is they that Speusippus seems to have followed.
But let us discuss these matters elsewhere; an objection to what we
have said, however, may be discerned in the fact that the Platonists have
not been speaking about all goods, and that the goods that are pursued
and loved for themselves are called good by reference to a single Form,
while those which tend to produce or to preserve these somehow or to
prevent their contraries are called so by reference to these, and in a
secondary sense. Clearly, then, goods must be spoken of in two ways,
and some must be good in themselves, the others by reason of these. Let
us separate, then, things good in themselves from things useful, and
consider whether the former are called good by reference to a single
Idea. What sort of goods would one call good in themselves? Is it those
that are pursued even when isolated from others, such as intelligence,
sight, and certain pleasures and honours? Certainly, if we pursue these
also for the sake of something else, yet one would place them among
things good in themselves. Or is nothing other than the Idea of good
good in itself? In that case the Form will be empty. But if the things we
have named are also things good in themselves, the account of the good
will have to appear as something identical in them all, as that of white-
ness is identical in snow and in white lead. But of honour, wisdom, and
pleasure, just in respect of their goodness, the accounts are distinct and
diverse. The good, therefore, is not some common element answering to
one Idea.
But what then do we mean by the good? It is surely not like the
things that only chance to have the same name. Are goods one, then, by
being derived from one good or by all contributing to one good, or are
they rather one by analogy? Certainly as sight is in the body, so is rea-
son in the soul, and so on in other cases. But perhaps these subjects had
better be dismissed for the present; for perfect precision about them
would be more appropriate to another branch of philosophy. And simi-

Nicomachean Ethics/9

larly with regard to the Idea; even if there is some one good which is
universally predicable of goods or is capable of separate and indepen-
dent existence, clearly it could not be achieved or attained by man; but
we are now seeking something attainable. Perhaps, however, some one
might think it worth while to recognize this with a view to the goods that
are attainable and achievable; for having this as a sort of pattern we
shall know better the goods that are good for us, and if we know them
shall attain them. This argument has some plausibility, but seems to
clash with the procedure of the sciences; for all of these, though they
aim at some good and seek to supply the deficiency of it, leave on one
side the knowledge of the good. Yet that all the exponents of the arts
should be ignorant of, and should not even seek, so great an aid is not
probable. It is hard, too, to see how a weaver or a carpenter will be
benefited in regard to his own craft by knowing this ‘good itself,’ or
how the man who has viewed the Idea itself will be a better doctor or
general thereby. For a doctor seems not even to study health in this way,
but the health of man, or perhaps rather the health of a particular man;
it is individuals that he is healing. But enough of these topics.

7

Let us again return to the good we are seeking, and ask what it can be.
It seems different in different actions and arts; it is different in medicine,
in strategy, and in the other arts likewise. What then is the good of each?
Surely that for whose sake everything else is done. In medicine this is
health, in strategy victory, in architecture a house, in any other sphere
something else, and in every action and pursuit the end; for it is for the
sake of this that all men do whatever else they do. Therefore, if there is
an end for all that we do, this will be the good achievable by action, and
if there are more than one, these will be the goods achievable by action.
So the argument has by a different course reached the same point;
but we must try to state this even more clearly. Since there are evidently
more than one end, and we choose some of these (e.g., wealth, flutes,
and in general instruments) for the sake of something else, clearly not
all ends are final ends; but the chief good is evidently something final.
Therefore, if there is only one final end, this will be what we are seek-
ing, and if there are more than one, the most final of these will be what
we are seeking. Now we call that which is in itself worthy of pursuit
more final than that which is worthy of pursuit for the sake of some-
thing else, and that which is never desirable for the sake of something

10/Aristotle
else more final than the things that are desirable both in themselves and
for the sake of that other thing, and therefore we call final without quali-
fication that which is always desirable in itself and never for the sake of
something else.
Now such a thing happiness, above all else, is held to be; for this we
choose always for self and never for the sake of something else, but
honour, pleasure, reason, and every virtue we choose indeed for them-
selves (for if nothing resulted from them we should still choose each of
them), but we choose them also for the sake of happiness, judging that
by means of them we shall be happy. Happiness, on the other hand, no
one chooses for the sake of these, nor, in general, for anything other
than itself.
From the point of view of self-sufficiency the same result seems to
follow; for the final good is thought to be self-sufficient. Now by self-
sufficient we do not mean that which is sufficient for a man by himself,
for one who lives a solitary life, but also for parents, children, wife, and
in general for his friends and fellow citizens, since man is born for citi-
zenship. But some limit must be set to this; for if we extend our require-
ment to ancestors and descendants and friends’ friends we are in for an
infinite series. Let us examine this question, however, on another occa-
sion; the self-sufficient we now define as that which when isolated makes
life desirable and lacking in nothing; and such we think happiness to be;
and further we think it most desirable of all things, without being counted
as one good thing among others—if it were so counted it would clearly
be made more desirable by the addition of even the least of goods; for
that which is added becomes an excess of goods, and of goods the greater
is always more desirable. Happiness, then, is something final and self-
sufficient, and is the end of action.
Presumably, however, to say that happiness is the chief good seems
a platitude, and a clearer account of what it is still desired. This might
perhaps be given, if we could first ascertain the function of man. For
just as for a flute-player, a sculptor, or an artist, and, in general, for all
things that have a function or activity, the good and the ‘well’ is thought
to reside in the function, so would it seem to be for man, if he has a
function. Have the carpenter, then, and the tanner certain functions or
activities, and has man none? Is he born without a function? Or as eye,
hand, foot, and in general each of the parts evidently has a function,
may one lay it down that man similarly has a function apart from all
these? What then can this be? Life seems to be common even to plants,

Nicomachean Ethics/11

but we are seeking what is peculiar to man. Let us exclude, therefore,
the life of nutrition and growth. Next there would be a life of perception,
but it also seems to be common even to the horse, the ox, and every
animal. There remains, then, an active life of the element that has a
rational principle; of this, one part has such a principle in the sense of
being obedient to one, the other in the sense of possessing one and exer-
cising thought. And, as ‘life of the rational element’ also has two mean-
ings, we must state that life in the sense of activity is what we mean; for
this seems to be the more proper sense of the term. Now if the function
of man is an activity of soul which follows or implies a rational prin-
ciple, and if we say ‘so-and-so-and ‘a good so-and-so’ have a function
which is the same in kind, e.g., a lyre, and a good lyre-player, and so
without qualification in all cases, eminence in respect of goodness being
idded to the name of the function (for the function of a lyre-player is to
play the lyre, and that of a good lyre-player is to do so well): if this is the
case, and we state the function of man to be a certain kind of life, and
this to be an activity or actions of the soul implying a rational principle,
and the function of a good man to be the good and noble performance of
these, and if any action is well performed when it is performed in accor-
dance with the appropriate excellence: if this is the case, human good
turns out to be activity of soul in accordance with virtue, and if there are
more than one virtue, in accordance with the best and most complete.
But we must add ‘in a complete life.’ For one swallow does not
make a summer, nor does one day; and so too one day, or a short time,
does not make a man blessed and happy.
Let this serve as an outline of the good; for we must presumably
first sketch it roughly, and then later fill in the details. But it would seem
that any one is capable of carrying on and articulating what has once
been well outlined, and that time is a good discoverer or partner in such
a work; to which facts the advances of the arts are due; for any one can
add what is lacking. And we must also remember what has been said
before, and not look for precision in all things alike, but in each class of
things such precision as accords with the subject-matter, and so much
as is appropriate to the inquiry. For a carpenter and a geometer investi-
gate the right angle in different ways; the former does so in so far as the
right angle is useful for his work, while the latter inquires what it is or
what sort of thing it is; for he is a spectator of the truth. We must act in
the same way, then, in all other matters as well, that our main task may
not be subordinated to minor questions. Nor must we demand the cause

12/Aristotle
in all matters alike; it is enough in some cases that the fact be well
established, as in the case of the first principles; the fact is the primary
thing or first principle. Now of first principles we see some by induc-
tion, some by perception, some by a certain habituation, and others too
in other ways. But each set of principles we must try to investigate in the
natural way, and we must take pains to state them definitely, since they
have a great influence on what follows. For the beginning is thought to
be more than half of the whole, and many of the questions we ask are
cleared up by it.

8

We must consider it, however, in the light not only of our conclusion and
our premisses, but also of what is commonly said about it; for with a
true view all the data harmonize, but with a false one the facts soon
clash. Now goods have been divided into three classes, and some are
described as external, others as relating to soul or to body; we call those
that relate to soul most properly and truly goods, and psychical actions
and activities we class as relating to soul. Therefore our account must
be sound, at least according to this view, which is an old one and agreed
on by philosophers. It is correct also in that we identify the end with
certain actions and activities; for thus it falls among goods of the soul
and not among external goods. Another belief which harmonizes with
our account is that the happy man lives well and does well; for we have
practically defined happiness as a sort of good life and good action. The
characteristics that are looked for in happiness seem also, all of them, to
belong to what we have defined happiness as being. For some identify
happiness with virtue, some with practical wisdom, others with a kind
of philosophic wisdom, others with these, or one of these, accompanied
by pleasure or not without pleasure; while others include also external
prosperity. Now some of these views have been held by many men and
men of old, others by a few eminent persons; and it is not probable that
either of these should be entirely mistaken, but rather that they should
be right in at least some one respect or even in most respects.
With those who identify happiness with virtue or some one virtue
our account is in harmony; for to virtue belongs virtuous activity. But it
makes, perhaps, no small difference whether we place the chief good in
possession or in use, in state of mind or in activity. For the state of mind
may exist without producing any good result, as in a man who is asleep
or in some other way quite inactive, but the activity cannot; for one who

Nicomachean Ethics/13

has the activity will of necessity be acting, and acting well. And as in the
Olympic Games it is not the most beautiful and the strongest that are
crowned but those who compete (for it is some of these that are victori-
ous), so those who act win, and rightly win, the noble and good things in
life.
Their life is also in itself pleasant. For pleasure is a state of soul,
and to each man that which he is said to be a lover of is pleasant; e.g.,
not only is a horse pleasant to the lover of horses, and a spectacle to the
lover of sights, but also in the same way just acts are pleasant to the
lover of justice and in general virtuous acts to the lover of virtue. Now
for most men their pleasures are in conflict with one another because
these are not by nature pleasant, but the lovers of what is noble find
pleasant the things that are by nature pleasant; and virtuous actions are
such, so that these are pleasant for such men as well as in their own
nature. Their life, therefore, has no further need of pleasure as a sort of
adventitious charm, but has its pleasure in itself. For, besides what we
have said, the man who does not rejoice in noble actions is not even
good; since no one would call a man just who did not enjoy acting justly,
nor any man liberal who did not enjoy liberal actions; and similarly in
all other cases. If this is so, virtuous actions must be in themselves
pleasant. But they are also good and noble, and have each of these at-
tributes in the highest degree, since the good man judges well about
these attributes; his judgement is such as we have described. Happiness
then is the best, noblest, and most pleasant thing in the world, and these
attributes are not severed as in the inscription at Delos—

Most noble is that which is justest, and best is health;
But pleasantest is it to win what we love.
For all these properties belong to the best activities; and these, or
one—the best—of these, we identify with happiness.
Yet evidently, as we said, it needs the external goods as well; for it is
impossible, or not easy, to do noble acts without the proper equipment.
In many actions we use friends and riches and political power as instru-
ments; and there are some things the lack of which takes the lustre from
happiness, as good birth, goodly children, beauty; for the man who is
very ugly in appearance or ill-born or solitary and childless is not very
likely to be happy, and perhaps a man would be still less likely if he had
thoroughly bad children or friends or had lost good children or friends

14/Aristotle
by death. As we said, then, happiness seems to need this sort of prosper-
ity in addition; for which reason some identify happiness with good
fortune, though others identify it with virtue.

9

For this reason also the question is asked, whether happiness is to be
acquired by learning or by habituation or some other sort of training, or
comes in virtue of some divine providence or again by chance. Now if
there is any gift of the gods to men, it is reasonable that happiness should
be god-given, and most surely god-given of all human things inasmuch
as it is the best. But this question would perhaps be more appropriate to
another inquiry; happiness seems, however, even if it is not god-sent but
comes as a result of virtue and some process of learning or training, to
be among the most godlike things; for that which is the prize and end of
virtue seems to be the best thing in the world, and something godlike and
blessed.
It will also on this view be very generally shared; for all who are not
maimed as regards their potentiality for virtue may win it by a certain
kind of study and care. But if it is better to be happy thus than by
chance, it is reasonable that the facts should be so, since everything that
depends on the action of nature is by nature as good as it can be, and
similarly everything that depends on art or any rational cause, and espe-
cially if it depends on the best of all causes. To entrust to chance what is
greatest and most noble would be a very defective arrangement.
The answer to the question we are asking is plain also from the
definition of happiness; for it has been said to be a virtuous activity of
soul, of a certain kind. Of the remaining goods, some must necessarily
pre-exist as conditions of happiness, and others are naturally co-opera-
tive and useful as instruments. And this will be found to agree with what
we said at the outset; for we stated the end of political science to be the
best end, and political science spends most of its pains on making the
citizens to be of a certain character, viz. good and capable of noble acts.
It is natural, then, that we call neither ox nor horse nor any other of
the animals happy; for none of them is capable of sharing in such activ-
ity. For this reason also a boy is not happy; for he is not yet capable of
such acts, owing to his age; and boys who are called happy are being
congratulated by reason of the hopes we have for them. For there is
required, as we said, not only complete virtue but also a complete life,
since many changes occur in life, and all manner of chances, and the

20/Aristotle
soul too there is something contrary to the rational principle, resisting
and opposing it. In what sense it is distinct from the other elements does
not concern us. Now even this seems to have a share in a rational prin-
ciple, as we said; at any rate in the continent man it obeys the rational
principle and presumably in the temperate and brave man it is still more
obedient; for in him it speaks, on all matters, with the same voice as the
rational principle.
Therefore the irrational element also appears to be two-fold. For
the vegetative element in no way shares in a rational principle, but the
appetitive and in general the desiring element in a sense shares in it, in
so far as it listens to and obeys it; this is the sense in which we speak of
‘taking account’ of one’s father or one’s friends, not that in which we
speak of ‘accounting for a mathematical property. That the irrational
element is in some sense persuaded by a rational principle is indicated
also by the giving of advice and by all reproof and exhortation. And if
this element also must be said to have a rational principle, that which
has a rational principle (as well as that which has not) will be twofold,
one subdivision having it in the strict sense and in itself, and the other
having a tendency to obey as one does one’s father.
Virtue too is distinguished into kinds in accordance with this differ-
ence; for we say that some of the virtues are intellectual and others
moral, philosophic wisdom and understanding and practical wisdom
being intellectual, liberality and temperance moral. For in speaking about
a man’s character we do not say that he is wise or has understanding but
that he is good-tempered or temperate; yet we praise the wise man also
with respect to his state of mind; and of states of mind we call those
which merit praise virtues.

BOOK II

1

Virtue, then, being of two kinds, intellectual and moral, intellectual vir-
tue in the main owes both its birth and its growth to teaching (for which
reason it requires experience and time), while moral virtue comes about
as a result of habit, whence also its name (ethike) is one that is formed
by a slight variation from the word ethos (habit). From this it is also
plain that none of the moral virtues arises in us by nature; for nothing
that exists by nature can form a habit contrary to its nature. For in-
stance the stone which by nature moves downwards cannot be habitu-
ated to move upwards, not even if one tries to train it by throwing it up

Nicomachean Ethics/21

ten thousand times; nor can fire be habituated to move downwards, nor
can anything else that by nature behaves in one way be trained to be-
have in another. Neither by nature, then, nor contrary to nature do the
virtues arise in us; rather we are adapted by nature to receive them, and
are made perfect by habit.
Again, of all the things that come to us by nature we first acquire
the potentiality and later exhibit the activity (this is plain in the case of
the senses; for it was not by often seeing or often hearing that we got
these senses, but on the contrary we had them before we used them, and
did not come to have them by using them); but the virtues we get by first
exercising them, as also happens in the case of the arts as well. For the
things we have to learn before we can do them, we learn by doing them,
e.g., men become builders by building and lyreplayers by playing the
lyre; so too we become just by doing just acts, temperate by doing tem-
perate acts, brave by doing brave acts.
This is confirmed by what happens in states; for legislators make
the citizens good by forming habits in them, and this is the wish of every
legislator, and those who do not effect it miss their mark, and it is in this
that a good constitution differs from a bad one.
Again, it is from the same causes and by the same means that every
virtue is both produced and destroyed, and similarly every art; for it is
from playing the lyre that both good and bad lyre-players are produced.
And the corresponding statement is true of builders and of all the rest;
men will be good or bad builders as a result of building well or badly.
For if this were not so, there would have been no need of a teacher, but
all men would have been born good or bad at their craft. This, then, is
the case with the virtues also; by doing the acts that we do in our trans-
actions with other men we become just or unjust, and by doing the acts
that we do in the presence of danger, and being habituated to feel fear or
confidence, we become brave or cowardly. The same is true of appetites
and feelings of anger; some men become temperate and good-tempered,
others self-indulgent and irascible, by behaving in one way or the other
in the appropriate circumstances. Thus, in one word, states of character
arise out of like activities. This is why the activities we exhibit must be
of a certain kind; it is because the states of character correspond to the
differences between these. It makes no small difference, then, whether
we form habits of one kind or of another from our very youth; it makes
a very great difference, or rather all the difference.

22/Aristotle

2

Since, then, the present inquiry does not aim at theoretical knowledge
like the others (for we are inquiring not in order to know what virtue is,
but in order to become good, since otherwise our inquiry would have
been of no use), we must examine the nature of actions, namely how we
ought to do them; for these determine also the nature of the states of
character that are produced, as we have said. Now, that we must act
according to the right rule is a common principle and must be assumed-
it will be discussed later, i.e., both what the right rule is, and how it is
related to the other virtues. But this must be agreed upon beforehand,
that the whole account of matters of conduct must be given in outline
and not precisely, as we said at the very beginning that the accounts we
demand must be in accordance with the subject-matter; matters con-
cerned with conduct and questions of what is good for us have no fixity,
any more than matters of health. The general account being of this na-
ture, the account of particular cases is yet more lacking in exactness; for
they do not fall under any art or precept but the agents themselves must
in each case consider what is appropriate to the occasion, as happens
also in the art of medicine or of navigation.
But though our present account is of this nature we must give what
help we can. First, then, let us consider this, that it is the nature of such
things to be destroyed by defect and excess, as we see in the case of
strength and of health (for to gain light on things imperceptible we must
use the evidence of sensible things); both excessive and defective exer-
cise destroys the strength, and similarly drink or food which is above or
below a certain amount destroys the health, while that which is propor-
tionate both produces and increases and preserves it. So too is it, then,
in the case of temperance and courage and the other virtues. For the
man who flies from and fears everything and does not stand his ground
against anything becomes a coward, and the man who fears nothing at
all but goes to meet every danger becomes rash; and similarly the man
who indulges in every pleasure and abstains from none becomes self-
indulgent, while the man who shuns every pleasure, as boors do, be-
comes in a way insensible; temperance and courage, then, are destroyed
by excess and defect, and preserved by the mean.
But not only are the sources and causes of their origination and
growth the same as those of their destruction, but also the sphere of
their actualization will be the same; for this is also true of the things
which are more evident to sense, e.g., of strength; it is produced by

Nicomachean Ethics/23

taking much food and undergoing much exertion, and it is the strong
man that will be most able to do these things. So too is it with the vir-
tues; by abstaining from pleasures we become temperate, and it is when
we have become so that we are most able to abstain from them; and
similarly too in the case of courage; for by being habituated to despise
things that are terrible and to stand our ground against them we become
brave, and it is when we have become so that we shall be most able to
stand our ground against them.

3

We must take as a sign of states of character the pleasure or pain that
ensues on acts; for the man who abstains from bodily pleasures and
delights in this very fact is temperate, while the man who is annoyed at
it is self-indulgent, and he who stands his ground against things that are
terrible and delights in this or at least is not pained is brave, while the
man who is pained is a coward. For moral excellence is concerned with
pleasures and pains; it is on account of the pleasure that we do bad
things, and on account of the pain that we abstain from noble ones.
Hence we ought to have been brought up in a particular way from our
very youth, as Plato says, so as both to delight in and to be pained by the
things that we ought; for this is the right education.
Again, if the virtues are concerned with actions and passions, and
every passion and every action is accompanied by pleasure and pain,
for this reason also virtue will be concerned with pleasures and pains.
This is indicated also by the fact that punishment is inflicted by these
means; for it is a kind of cure, and it is the nature of cures to be effected
by contraries.
Again, as we said but lately, every state of soul has a nature relative
to and concerned with the kind of things by which it tends to be made
worse or better; but it is by reason of pleasures and pains that men
become bad, by pursuing and avoiding these—either the pleasures and
pains they ought not or when they ought not or as they ought not, or by
going wrong in one of the other similar ways that may be distinguished.
Hence men even define the virtues as certain states of impassivity and
rest; not well, however, because they speak absolutely, and do not say
‘as one ought’ and ‘as one ought not’ and ‘when one ought or ought
not,’ and the other things that may be added. We assume, then, that this
kind of excellence tends to do what is best with regard to pleasures and
pains, and vice does the contrary.

24/Aristotle

The following facts also may show us that virtue and vice are con-
cerned with these same things. There being three objects of choice and
three of avoidance, the noble, the advantageous, the pleasant, and their
contraries, the base, the injurious, the painful, about all of these the
good man tends to go right and the bad man to go wrong, and especially
about pleasure; for this is common to the animals, and also it accompa-
nies all objects of choice; for even the noble and the advantageous ap-
pear pleasant.
Again, it has grown up with us all from our infancy; this is why it is
difficult to rub off this passion, engrained as it is in our life. And we
measure even our actions, some of us more and others less, by the rule
of pleasure and pain. For this reason, then, our whole inquiry must be
about these; for to feel delight and pain rightly or wrongly has no small
effect on our actions.
Again, it is harder to fight with pleasure than with anger, to use
Heraclitus’ phrase,’ but both art and virtue are always concerned with
what is harder; for even the good is better when it is harder. Therefore
for this reason also the whole concern both of virtue and of political
science is with pleasures and pains; for the man who uses these well will
be good, he who uses them badly bad.
That virtue, then, is concerned with pleasures and pains, and that
by the acts from which it arises it is both increased and, if they are done
differently, destroyed, and that the acts from which it arose are those in
which it actualizes itself—let this be taken as said.

4

The question might be asked,; what we mean by saying that we must
become just by doing just acts, and temperate by doing temperate acts;
for if men do just and temperate acts, they are already just and temper-
ate, exactly as, if they do what is in accordance with the laws of gram-
mar and of music, they are grammarians and musicians.
Or is this not true even of the arts? It is possible to do something
that is in accordance with the laws of grammar, either by chance or at
the suggestion of another. A man will be a grammarian, then, only when
he has both done something grammatical and done it grammatically;
and this means doing it in accordance with the grammatical knowledge
in himself.
Again, the case of the arts and that of the virtues are not similar; for
the products of the arts have their goodness in themselves, so that it is

Nicomachean Ethics/25

enough that they should have a certain character, but if the acts that are
in accordance with the virtues have themselves a certain character it
does not follow that they are done justly or temperately. The agent also
must be in a certain condition when he does them; in the first place he
must have knowledge, secondly he must choose the acts, and choose
them for their own sakes, and thirdly his action must proceed from a
firm and unchangeable character. These are not reckoned in as condi-
tions of the possession of the arts, except the bare knowledge; but as a
condition of the possession of the virtues knowledge has little or no
weight, while the other conditions count not for a little but for every-
thing, i.e., the very conditions which result from often doing just and
temperate acts.
Actions, then, are called just and temperate when they are such as
the just or the temperate man would do; but it is not the man who does
these that is just and temperate, but the man who also does them as just
and temperate men do them. It is well said, then, that it is by doing just
acts that the just man is produced, and by doing temperate acts the
temperate man; without doing these no one would have even a prospect
of becoming good.
But most people do not do these, but take refuge in theory and think
they are being philosophers and will become good in this way, behaving
somewhat like patients who listen attentively to their doctors, but do
none of the things they are ordered to do. As the latter will not be made
well in body by such a course of treatment, the former will not be made
well in soul by such a course of philosophy.

5

Next we must consider what virtue is. Since things that are found in the
soul are of three kinds—passions, faculties, states of character, virtue
must be one of these. By passions I mean appetite, anger, fear, confi-
dence, envy, joy, friendly feeling, hatred, longing, emulation, pity, and
in general the feelings that are accompanied by pleasure or pain; by
faculties the things in virtue of which we are said to be capable of feel-
ing these, e.g., of becoming angry or being pained or feeling pity; by
states of character the things in virtue of which we stand well or badly
with reference to the passions, e.g., with reference to anger we stand
badly if we feel it violently or too weakly, and well if we feel it moder-
ately; and similarly with reference to the other passions.
Now neither the virtues nor the vices are passions, because we are

26/Aristotle
not called good or bad on the ground of our passions, but are so called
on the ground of our virtues and our vices, and because we are neither
praised nor blamed for our passions (for the man who feels fear or anger
is not praised, nor is the man who simply feels anger blamed, but the
man who feels it in a certain way), but for our virtues and our vices we
are praised or blamed.
Again, we feel anger and fear without choice, but the virtues are
modes of choice or involve choice. Further, in respect of the passions we
are said to be moved, but in respect of the virtues and the vices we are
said not to be moved but to be disposed in a particular way.
For these reasons also they are not faculties; for we are neither
called good nor bad, nor praised nor blamed, for the simple capacity of
feeling the passions; again, we have the faculties by nature, but we are
not made good or bad by nature; we have spoken of this before. If, then,
the virtues are neither passions nor faculties, all that remains is that they
should be states of character.

Thus we have stated what virtue is in respect of its genus.

6

We must, however, not only describe virtue as a state of character, but
also say what sort of state it is. We may remark, then, that every virtue
or excellence both brings into good condition the thing of which it is the
excellence and makes the work of that thing be done well; e.g., the ex-
cellence of the eye makes both the eye and its work good; for it is by the
excellence of the eye that we see well. Similarly the excellence of the
horse makes a horse both good in itself and good at running and at
carrying its rider and at awaiting the attack of the enemy. Therefore, if
this is true in every case, the virtue of man also will be the state of
character which makes a man good and which makes him do his own
work well.
How this is to happen we have stated already, but it will be made
plain also by the following consideration of the specific nature of virtue.
In everything that is continuous and divisible it is possible to take more,
less, or an equal amount, and that either in terms of the thing itself or
relatively to us; and the equal is an intermediate between excess and
defect. By the intermediate in the object I mean that which is equidistant
from each of the extremes, which is one and the same for all men; by the
intermediate relatively to us that which is neither too much nor too little—
and this is not one, nor the same for all. For instance, if ten is many and

Nicomachean Ethics/27

two is few, six is the intermediate, taken in terms of the object; for it
exceeds and is exceeded by an equal amount; this is intermediate ac-
cording to arithmetical proportion. But the intermediate relatively to us
is not to be taken so; if ten pounds are too much for a particular person
to eat and two too little, it does not follow that the trainer will order six
pounds; for this also is perhaps too much for the person who is to take
it, or too little—too little for Milo, too much for the beginner in athletic
exercises. The same is true of running and wrestling. Thus a master of
any art avoids excess and defect, but seeks the intermediate and chooses
this—the intermediate not in the object but relatively to us.
If it is thus, then, that every art does its work well—by looking to
the intermediate and judgling its works by this standard (so that we
often say of good works of art that it is not possible either to take away
or to add anything, implying that excess and defect destroy the goodness
of works of art, while the mean preserves it; and good artists, as we say,
look to this in their work), and if, further, virtue is more exact and better
than any art, as nature also is, then virtue must have the quality of
aiming at the intermediate. I mean moral virtue; for it is this that is
concerned with passions and actions, and in these there is excess, de-
fect, and the intermediate. For instance, both fear and confidence and
appetite and anger and pity and in general pleasure and pain may be felt
both too much and too little, and in both cases not well; but to feel them
at the right times, with reference to the right objects, towards the right
people, with the right motive, and in the right way, is what is both inter-
mediate and best, and this is characteristic of virtue. Similarly with
regard to actions also there is excess, defect, and the intermediate. Now
virtue is concerned with passions and actions, in which excess is a form
of failure, and so is defect, while the intermediate is praised and is a
form of success; and being praised and being successful are both char-
acteristics of virtue. Therefore virtue is a kind of mean, since, as we
have seen, it aims at what is intermediate.
Again, it is possible to fail in many ways (for evil belongs to the
class of the unlimited, as the Pythagoreans conjectured, and good to that
of the limited), while to succeed is possible only in one way (for which
reason also one is easy and the other difficult—to miss the mark easy, to
hit it difficult); for these reasons also, then, excess and defect are char-
acteristic of vice, and the mean of virtue;

For men are good in but one way, but bad in many.
Virtue, then, is a state of character concerned with choice, lying in a

28/Aristotle
mean, i.e., the mean relative to us, this being determined by a rational
principle, and by that principle by which the man of practical wisdom
would determine it. Now it is a mean between two vices, that which
depends on excess and that which depends on defect; and again it is a
mean because the vices respectively fall short of or exceed what is right
in both passions and actions, while virtue both finds and chooses that
which is intermediate. Hence in respect of its substance and the defini-
tion which states its essence virtue is a mean, with regard to what is best
and right an extreme.
But not every action nor every passion admits of a mean; for some
have names that already imply badness, e.g., spite, shamelessness, envy,
and in the case of actions adultery, theft, murder; for all of these and
suchlike things imply by their names that they are themselves bad, and
not the excesses or deficiencies of them. It is not possible, then, ever to
be right with regard to them; one must always be wrong. Nor does good-
ness or badness with regard to such things depend on committing adul-
tery with the right woman, at the right time, and in the right way, but
simply to do any of them is to go wrong. It would be equally absurd,
then, to expect that in unjust, cowardly, and voluptuous action there
should be a mean, an excess, and a deficiency; for at that rate there
would be a mean of excess and of deficiency, an excess of excess, and a
deficiency of deficiency. But as there is no excess and deficiency of
temperance and courage because what is intermediate is in a sense an
extreme, so too of the actions we have mentioned there is no mean nor
any excess and deficiency, but however they are done they are wrong;
for in general there is neither a mean of excess and deficiency, nor ex-
cess and deficiency of a mean.

7

We must, however, not only make this general statement, but also apply
it to the individual facts. For among statements about conduct those
which are general apply more widely, but those which are particular are
more genuine, since conduct has to do with individual cases, and our
statements must harmonize with the facts in these cases. We may take
these cases from our table. With regard to feelings of fear and confi-
dence courage is the mean; of the people who exceed, he who exceeds in
fearlessness has no name (many of the states have no name), while the
man who exceeds in confidence is rash, and he who exceeds in fear and
falls short in confidence is a coward. With regard to pleasures and pains—

