Frequently Asked Questions for Language Skills Classes (Jones) 

Consultation 

Can I talk to you before or after class? I will try to answer quick questions before or after class. It is often not 
possible to deal with multiple or more complex questions, though, because I frequently have to teach another 
class directly before or after our session together. This involves picking up materials, making copies at a time 
when  the  copier  is  free,  and  setting  up  technical  equipment,  so  I  often  have  to  rush.  Please  don’t 
misunderstand this as unwillingness to speak to you.  

Does it really have to be your office hour? Since students sometimes come to my classes late or leave early in 
order to visit the office hours of other teachers, I consider it equally realistic to ask you do the same to visit 
mine. If, however, you have a valid reason for not being able to see me during my office hour, I will endeavour 
to  make  an  alternative  appointment.  This  does  not  always  work  out  due  to  the  classes  I  teach,  faculty 
meetings, etc, so wherever possible, please use the office hour.   

If there is a queue, will you still see me after the official end of the office hour? As long as I don’t have an 
urgent appointment after my office hour finishes, yes. 

Will  there  be  office  hours  during  the  semester  break?  Yes,  but  not  every  week  and  not  necessarily  at  the 
same times. Check the announcements on the IfAA Stud-IP for my office hours during the semester break. Also 
see my email signature. 

Recognition of Courses 

Can  I  have  the  course  that  I  am  registered  in  recognised  for  [insert  course  of  study  /  module  here]?  Any 
questions about this should be directed to our coordinator of studies, Mr Brinkmann (rbrinkmann@uos.de). 

 

Moodle 

Do we need to do the tasks on Moodle? You need to do an absolute minimum of 80% of all online tasks on Moodle 
in  IELP  I  and  II  and  AELP  Speaking.  This  counts  as  basic  course  participation  and  you  cannot  pass  the  course  without 
having done at least 80% of them. 

What is the access password for my course on Moodle? Your teacher gave you this password in the first class 
session. It is also in the course plan document for IELP and AELP courses, which you will find on the courses’ 
Stud-IP pages. 

Whom should I contact with questions about or problems with Moodle? During the semester: Juliane Busch 
(julbusch@uos.de).  During  the  semester  break:  Mr.  Bonk  (jbonk@uos.de).  You  can  also  write  to  the  “IFAA 
Support" account on Moodle. 

I have a technical problem with Moodle. What should I do? Contact the email addresses above. Do not ignore the 
problem and hope for the best. 

I didn't do the tasks on Moodle in time. Can you put the quiz online again? By re-activating the quizzes, your 
fellow students will no longer be able to see the solutions and check their work Therefore, we will not be able to do that 
as it would deprive your classmates who completed the tasks on time of the chance to learn from them. Plan ahead using 
reminders on your mobile / email program. 

 

Exams 

When  is  my  IELP  I  /  II  final  test?  This  takes  place  during  the  penultimate  course  session,  in  your  course’s 
classroom. 

When  is  my  AELP  Writing  final  test?  This  takes  place  during  the  final  course  session,  in  your  course’s 
classroom. 

I have another exam at the time of my IELP I / II / AELP Writing final test. What can I do? Contact your class 
teacher to arrange to write your test during the session of one of the other classes. 

What do I need to be able to do in the IELP I / II test? There will be questions on grammar, productive and 
receptive vocabulary and mistakes identification and correction 

When is my IELP II oral exam? Sign up for an appointment using the online form that we send around by email 
at the appropriate time. 

What happens if I am  ill on the day of  my  exam?  Contact  your course teacher and let  them know  straight 
away. You will be able to come and take the exam on the second examination date. Make sure that you go to 
the doctor and get written confirmation that you are ill; hand in a copy of this on the second examination date.  

What happens if I fail the  oral exam? You will be offered the chance to re-take it on a second examination 
date.  

What do I need to be able to do in the Achievement Test? You will be tested on grammar, productive and 
receptive vocabulary and mistakes identification and correction. 

When is the next Achievement Test? The AT takes place every April and October in the week shortly before 
the start of each teaching semester. 

Submission of Course Tasks 

When  do  I  need  to  hand  in  my  paper  /  recorded  monologue?  In  AELP  Speaking,  you  need  to  submit  the 
recorded monologue  on the  day of your final class session.  In the AELP  Writing  course, your essay is due  in 
week 11 of the semester. In ALS / L2 / F4 courses, papers are due during the final class session. 

Why  is  the  deadline  not  during  the  semester  break?  We  Language  Skills  lecturers  teach  nine  classes  each 
semester. With 25-30 students per class, this amounts to an average of 250 papers and exams to mark at the 
end of each teaching semester, as well as recorded monologues for AELP Speaking courses. This means around 
350,000  words  to  read,  accompanying  grading  /  comments  forms  to  fill  out  as  well  as  70-90  exams!  These 
grades then also have to be entered into OPIUM. These administrative tasks have to be done under quite a bit 
of time pressure so that we can turn our attention to preparing the classes for the subsequent semester. We 
cannot have a backlog of papers moving into the subsequent semester alongside our teaching load so you will 
need to plan to hand in your assessed tasks at the end of the teaching semester.  

How can I hand in my paper? You need to hand in your paper in printed form. You can do this either in the 
class on the day or the deadline, or in any office hour on or before that date. You can also hand it in at the 
secretaries’ office on or before the  deadline. Your final option is by post,  making sure  that it arrives on the 
date of the deadline. Please make sure that your paper is in a folder, that you have gone through the Checklist 
for  Term  Papers  and  that  you  have  printed  and  signed  the  Grading  Form  with  Student’s  Declaration  and 
added it after the cover sheet. 

Can I send you my paper by email? No. It needs to be printed. 

Can I send you my recorded monologue by email for AELP Speaking? You can imagine the implications of 90 
students  sending  me  their  monologues  by  email;  it  causes  issues  of  capacity  for  my  inbox  and  the 
administrative  workload  of  having  to  go  through  my  inbox  to  find  them  all.  You  need  to  use  the  upload 
function on Moodle for this. 

My monologue is HUGE and Moodle says it's too large to upload. What can I do? You have probably exported 
your monologue as a WAV file. Instead, export it as an MP3, OGG, AAC or pretty much any other file format 
(you have a choice when saving; just use the drop-down menu to choose) and upload that file. It will be small 
enough to upload. 

Can I hand my paper / recorded monologue in late? This is a common sense question. If you have mitigating 
circumstances (e.g. illness, bereavement or emergency) on the day of the deadline or in the immediate period 
leading  up  to  it,  I  will  consider  giving  an  extension.  Contact  me  in  these  cases  so  that  we  can  make 
arrangements. Extensions are not available because you have to write papers for other classes or because you 
have exams at the end of the semester; this situation affects virtually all students. You know the deadline well 
in advance and are responsible for and capable of planning your time accordingly. The same applies if you had 
a cold for two or three days a month before the deadline. Extensions also do not apply to cases of computer 
problems or empty printer cartridges; save your paper on a USB stick or Dropbox / Google Drive / your own 
server  and  use  the  CLS  for  recording  monologues  and  a  copy  shop  for  printing.  If  you  hand  in  the  paper  / 
monologue  up  to  a  week  late  without  mitigating  circumstances,  I  will  still  accept  it,  but  the  grade  will  be 
lowered. If you hand it in later than that without a very good reason, it will not be accepted. 

Other Teachers' Policies 

I have heard from my fellow student['s uncle's best friend's cat] that students in someone else's class have 
to do something different. Is this true and, if so, why? In most cases, all three lectors have the same policies 
and guidelines. Occasionally, they may differ, either due to slight variations in teaching philosophy, differences 
in the sizes or number of sessions of the classes, e.g. if public or religious holidays impact the number of class 
sessions. It may also be the case that the subject matter of the ALS/L2/F4 class allows for / requires a different 
type of task. Whatever the reason, your teacher will have outlined their requirements to you at the start of the 
course so that you know exactly what you need to do. It is perfectly legitimate for you to consult your fellow 
students,  but  please  rely  on  information  from  students  in  your  own  class  if  it  is  about  a  question  of 
importance. If in doubt, consult your course description, this FAQ list or me. 

Papers 

Can  I  write  my  paper  about  anything  I  like?  In  the  L2/F4/ALS  courses,  the  only  real  rule  is  that  the  paper 
should be directly related to the subject matter of the course in some way. In the AELP Writing courses, you 
can choose any topic for your take-home paper, as long as it presents you the opportunity to discuss the topic 
critically. 

Do I need to check the topic of my paper with you? This is not mandatory, although the advantages of getting 
feedback and tips in advance of writing your paper should be obvious.  

When can I talk to you about ideas or questions about my paper? In general, you should come and see me in 
an office hour. If this is not possible and you require email feedback, you need to send me any information or 
questions at least two weeks before the due date. Given the number of students writing papers in my classes, I 
cannot guarantee written feedback if you write to me any later. 

How long does my paper have to be? AELP Writing classes: approx. 750 words for your paper at home, 500 
words for your paper in class.  ALS Bachelor classes: approx. 1000 words. L2/F4 classes: approx. 5000 words. 

Since you are also leading part of a session as part of the L2/F4 course, I am accepting that task as counting for 
2000 of the 5000 words, so your papers should be approx. 3000 words. These word counts are for the text of 
the paper you write, not the cover sheet, table of contents and bibliography. 

What style of writing should I use? AELP Writing classes: you need to use a discursive academic style in your 
paper. In the final class session, your paper in class should be in an argumentative academic style. L2/F4/ALS: 
You  will  normally  have  a  choice  of  what  style of  writing  to  use.  Most  students  use  either  an  academic or  a 
creative style of writing. Journalistic papers would also be acceptable, as long as you can reach the appropriate 
length  for  the  paper  while  staying  true  to  the  genre.  What  I  am  not  looking  for  is  summaries  of  existing 
literature or diary-style "I think..." papers. Some critical engagement with the topic is required. 
 
How  can  I  avoid  plagiarism?  Make  sure  you  attribute  any  information  or  ideas  that  you  have  gained  from 
other sources  to those  sources,  either  by quoting or paraphrasing them with appropriate references  and by 
including them in your bibliography.  

How  much  of  my  paper  can  be  quotes?  Since  you  are  writing  a  paper  for  a  Language  Skills  class,  the  vast 
majority of the paper should be your own words. As a rule of thumb, a maximum of 10% of your word count 
can  be  direct  quotes.  Therefore,  consider  paraphrasing  and  appropriately  referencing  some  of  your  sources 
rather than quoting all of them. 

Can I use graphics in my paper? Yes, as long as they are attributed to their original sources. These graphics do 
not count towards your word count.  

How  should  I  format  my  paper?  I  recommend  the  APA  or  MLA  guidelines.  If  you  wish  to  use  a  different 
format, you should check with me in advance. There is some basic information on my checklist for papers.  

Can I hand in the same paper for more than one class? No. In fact you need to sign a declaration that you 
have not done so. 

 

Grades and Feedback 

How will I know when my paper / session / recorded monologue has been graded? Check OPIUM. In AELP 
Speaking, also check the task on Moodle for feedback. 

Will I get my paper back? Yes, as long as you come and pick it up from one of my office hours. 

Will  I  get  feedback  on  my  paper  /  session  /  recorded  monologue?  Yes,  there  will  be  comments  and 
corrections on your paper, and there will be a grading sheet so that you can see transparently how your grade 
was decided. You can come and see me in my office hour to discuss your paper and tips for improvement or to 
ask any questions about it if you wish. 

Can I have my grade / my feedback  on individual tasks  by email?  Sorry, no. Given the  number of papers / 
exams  /  recorded  monologues  that  I  grade  in  a  single  semester,  this  would  result  in  an  unrealistically  high 
volume of administration. Your final course grades will be visible to you on OPIUM, and you can pick up your 
papers / feedback in an office hour during the semester break or at the start of the new semester. 

I am a Master student. Can I use my 'joker' to get a better grade? You can take a new L2/F4 course with your 
'joker' to improve your grade, keeping in mind that you will need to complete all course requirements in that 
class. You cannot write a second term paper for the same course. 

