Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

Referatsthemen Seminar Adaptives Ressourcenmanagement WS 2014/15 

Die  Themen  sind  jeweils  in  inhaltlichen  Blöcken  gruppiert.  Es  ist  erwünscht,  dass  sich  die  Vortragenden  eines  Themenblocks  austauschen,  um  die  Vorträge 
aufeinander abzustimmen. Im Normalfall umfasst ein Block 2 Themen. Dafür steht eine Doppelstunde zur Verfügung (10.15-11.45). In zwei Fällen umfasst ein 
Block 3 Themen. Um genug Zeit zu haben, geht die Vorlesung an diesen Tagen von 9.30-12.00 Uhr. Die Reihenfolge der Themen entspricht der erwünschten 
zeitlichen Abfolge. Jedoch gibt es eine gewisse Flexibilität bei den eher anwendungsorientierten Blöcken.  

Thema 

1.  Unsicherheiten 
Konzept 

Inhaltliche Schwerpunkte 

Charakterisierung von Quellen von 
Unsicherheiten im Ressourcemanagement 
und von Strategien mit diesen umzugehen. 
Das vorhandene Material bietet dazu eine 
sehr gute Einführung und Grundlage.  

2.  Umgang mit 

Unsicherheiten in 
Modellierung  

 

 

3.  Anwendung Adaptives 

Management 
Wasserqualität 

4.  Szenarienplanung und 

AM 
 
 
 
 
 

Einführung in den Ansatz der Quantifizierung 
von Unsicherheiten mit Bayes’schen 
Wahrscheinlichkeiten und Integration in der 
Modellierung 
 
Adaptives Management der Umsetzung des 
gesetzlichen Vorgaben für Wasserqualität 
TDML (Total Daily Maximum Load)  - unter 
anderem unter Anwendung des Ansatzes der 
Bayes’schen Wahrscheinlichkeiten  
  
Vorstellung der Methode der 
Szenarienplanung als ein Ansatz des Umgangs 
mit Unsicherheiten im Adaptiven 
Ressourcenmanagements 

Literatur 

Brugnach,M. Henriksen,HJ, van der Keur,P. and Mysiak,J. 2009. 
Uncertainty in adaptive water management. Concepts and 
Guidelines. Report Newater Project.  
URL: www.newater.uni-osnabrueck.de/index.php?pid=1045 

Brugnach, M., A. Dewulf, C. Pahl-Wostl, and T. Taillieu. 2008. 
Toward a relational concept of uncertainty: about knowing too 
little, knowing too differently, and accepting not to know. 
Ecology and Society 13(2): 30. [online] URL: 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol13/iss2/art30/ 

Anmerkungen 

Formale Kenntnisse sind 
nicht notwendig, da 
Schwerpunkt auf den 
Konzepten liegt und 
nicht auf der formalen 
Umsetzung  

Borsuk et al. 2001. Stakeholder Values and Scientific Modeling in 
the Neuse River Watershed. Group Decision Making and 
Negotiation. 10: 355-373.   

Für Einführung 
Interesse an formalen 
Methoden notwendig  

 

Stow et al, 2002.  Nitrogen TDML development in the Neuse 
River Watershed: An imperative for Adaptive Management. 
Journal of Contemporary Water Research and Education.  22(1), 
16-26. 

 

Caves, J. K., G. S. Bodner, K. Simms, L. A. Fisher, and T. 
Robertson. 2013. Integrating collaboration, adaptive 
management, and scenario-planning: experiences at Las 
Cienegas National Conservation Area. Ecology and Society 18(3): 
43. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-05749-180343 

Rowland, E.R., Cross, M.S., Hartmann, H. (2014) Considering 
Multiple Futures: Scenario Planning to Address Uncertainty in 
Natural Resource Conservation. Washington, DC: US Fish and 

 

 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

 
 

5.  Partizipation in AM  

Einführung in die Rolle von und 
Herausforderungen mit partizipativen 
Ansätzen im Adaptiven 
Ressourcenmanagemnet 

6.  AM  Wassermärkte 

Konzept 

7.  Wassermärkte 
Erfahrungen in 
Australien 
 
 
 

8.  Policy Experimente in 

China 

Einführung in das Konzept der Wassermärkte 
für Allokation der knappen Ressource Wasser. 
Potential und Grenzen dieses Instruments 
flexibel auf Veränderungen zu reagieren und 
nachhaltiges Wassermanagement zu 
unterstützen.  
 
Erfahrungen mit Wassermärkten in 
Australien.  

Vorstellung der Logik von Politikexperimenten 
in China und Illustration der Anwendung für 
Allokation von Wasserressourcen im 
Einzugsgebiet des Gelben Flusses 

9.  AM Environmental 

Flows 

10. Ecosystem Restoration  

Einführung in das Konzept der Environmental 
Flows und deren Umsetzung mit einem 
Adaptiven Managementansatz 

Analyse der Umsetzung von adaptivem 
Management von Environmental Flows im 
Einzugsgebiet des Colorado - Glen Canyon 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Wildlife Service. 

Plummer, R., B. Crona, D. R. Armitage, P. Olsson, M. Tengö, and 
O. Yudina. 2012. Adaptive comanagement: a systematic review 
and analysis. Ecology and Society 17(3): 11. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-04952-170311 

Stringer, L. C., A. J. Dougill, E. Fraser, K. Hubacek, C. Prell, and M. 
S. Reed. 2006. Unpacking “participation” in the adaptive 
management of social–ecological systems: a critical 
review. Ecology and Society 11(2): 39. [online] URL: 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss2/art39/ 

Adler J.H. 'Water Marketing as an Adaptive Response to the 
Threat of Climate Change', Hamline Law Review, 31 (1), 730-54. 

Grafton R.Q., G. Libecap, S. Mcglennon, C. Landry and B. O’brien 
(2011), 'An Integrated Assessment of Water Markets: A Cross-
Country Comparison', Review of Environmental Economics and 
Policy, 5 (2), 219-39 

Loch, A, Wheeler, S, Bjornlund, H, Beecham, S, Edwards, J, Zuo 
and Shanahan, M 2013 The role of water markets in climate 
change adaptation, National Climate Change Adaptation 
Research Facility, Gold Coast. pp.142 

Heilmann S (2008) Policy experimentation in China’s economic 
rise. Stud Comp Int Dev 43:1–26.  doi:10.1007/s12116-007-9014-
4. 

Xia,C. and Pahl-Wostl, C. 2012. The development of water 
allocation management in the Yellow River Basin. Water 
Resources Management.  26(12): 3395–3414. doi: 
10.1007/s11269-012-0078-1. 

Richter et al 2006. A collaborative and adaptive process for 
developing environmental flow recommendations. River 
Research and Application, 22: 297-318.  

Camacho, Alejandro E. and Susskind, Lawrence E. and Schenk, 
Todd, (2010). Collaborative Planning and Adaptive Management 
in Glen Canyon: A Cautionary Tale. Columbia Journal of 
Environmental Law, Vol. 35, No. 1;  Available at 

 

 

 

Ökologisch - 
Naturwissenschaftlicher 
Schwerpunkt 

Schwerpunkt auf 
Governance – 
institutionellen 
Randbedingungen 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

11. Rehabilitation 
Ökosysteme  
Everglades 
 
 

 

12. Everglades – neuer 

formaliserter Ansatz 

13. Rehabilitation 

Ökosysteme 
Donana Spanien 

14. AM  Biodiversität 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

15. Ecosystem Restoration 

 
Analyse der eher ernüchternden Erfahrungen 
mit adaptivem Management in den 
Everglades  

Vorstellung eines neuen formalisierten 
Ansatzes, mit dem Ziel Probleme der 
Umsetzung von AM in den Everglades zu 
begegnen   

SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1572720 

Gunderson and Light. 2006. Adaptive management and adaptive 
governance in the everglades ecosystem. Policy Science, 39:323–
334 

 

LoSchiavo, A. J., R. G. Best, R. E. Burns, S. Gray, M. C. Harwell, E. 
B. Hines, A. R. McLean, T. St. Clair, S. Traxler, and J. W. Vearil. 
2013. Lessons learned from the first decade of adaptive 
management in comprehensive Everglades restoration. Ecology 
and Society 18(4): 70. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-06065-
180470 

Convertino M., C.M. Foran, J.M. Keisler, L. Scarlett, A. Loschiavo, 
G.A. Kiker and I. Linkov (2013), 'Enhanced Adaptive 
Management: Integrating Decision Analysis, Scenario Analysis 
and Environmental Modeling for the Everglades', Sci. Rep., 3 

Interesse an formalen 
Methoden und 
mathematisches 
Verständnis notwendig 

Erfahrungen mit Adaptivem Management im 
Mündungsgebiet des Guadalquivir in Spanien 
angesichts starrer institutioneller 
Randbedingungen 

Mendez et al, 2013. Facilitating transitional processes in rigid 
institutional regimes for water management and wetland 
conservation: experience from the Guadalquivir Estuary. Ecology 
and Society 17(1): 26. 

 

Einsatz von AM für die Umsetzung des 
Endangered Species Act aus einer 
formalisierten Entscheidungstheoretischen 
Perspektive   

Michael C. Runge (2011) An Introduction to Adaptive 
Management for Threatened and Endangered Species. Journal of 
Fish and Wildlife Management: December 2011, Vol. 2, No. 2, 
pp. 220-233. doi/abs/10.3996/082011-JFWM-045 

Tyre AJ, Peterson JT, Converse SJ, Bogich T, Miller D, Post van der 
Burg M, Thomas C, Thompson R, Wood J, Brewer DC, Runge MC. 
2011. Adaptive management of bull trout populations in the 
Lemhi Basin. Journal of Fish and Wildlife Management 2(2):262–
281; e1944-687X. doi: 10.3996/022011-JFWM-012 

Cosens, B. A., and M. K. Williams. 2012. Resilience and water 
governance: adaptive governance in the Columbia River basin. 
Ecology and Society 17(4): 3 

Lawrence J., A. Reisinger, B. Mullan and B. Jackson (2013), 
'Exploring climate change uncertainties to support adaptive 
management of changing flood-risk', Environmental Science & 
Policy, 33, 133-42.  

Anwendung von 
Simulationsmodellen 
wesentlicher Aspekt.  
Mathematisches 
Verständnis notwendig.  

 

 

16. Anpassung 

Klimawandel - 
Hochwasserrisiken 

Erfahrungen mit AM zu Wiedereinführung 
des Lachses im Columbia Basin  - 
Schwerpunkt auf der Notwendigkeit von 
adaptive governance.  
Bedeutung der Klimawandels für den Umgang 
mit Hochwasserrisiken und Vorstellung eines 
einfachen, formaliserten Instruments um mit 
diesen Unsicherheiten umzugehen 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

17. Dezentrale Systeme - 

Hochwasserrisiken  
 
 

18. Anpassung 

Klimawandel - 
Waldmanagement 

19. Strukturelle Barrieren 

AM 

Vorstellung von dezentralen Ansätzen im 
urbanen Wassermanagement um dessen 
Flexibilität und Anpassungsfähigkeit zu 
erhöhen 

Adaptives Management von 
Waldökosystemen angesichts der 
Unsicherheiten aufgrund des zu erwartenden 
Klimawandels 

Zusammenfassende Analyse der strukturellen 
Barrieren für Adaptives Management – als 
Grundlage für die abschließende Diskussion 
zu Möglichkeiten und Grenzen und 
Herausforderungen mit diesem Ansatz 

Schuetze, T. and Chelleri, L. (2013) Integrating Decentralized 
Rainwater Management in Urban Planning and Design: Flood 
Resilient and Sustainable Water Management Using the Example 
of Coastal Cities in The Netherlands and Taiwan. Water 2013, 5, 
593-616; doi:10.3390/w5020593 
Temperli C., H. Bugmann and C. Elkin (2012), 'Adaptive 
management for competing forest goods and services under 
climate change', Ecological Applications, 22 (8), 2065-77. 

Allan C, Curtis A. 2005. Nipped in the bud: why regional scale 
adaptive management is not blooming. Environmental 
Management 36:414–425. 

Allen C.R. and L.H. Gunderson (2011), 'Pathology and failure in 
the design and implementation of adaptive management', 
Journal of Environmental Management, 92 (5), 1379-84 

Interesse an 
technischen 
Fragestellungen  

Anwendung von 
Simulationsmodellen 
wesentlicher Aspekt.  
Mathematisches 
Verständnis notwendig 
 

 
 

 

 

 

Referenz 

Brugnach,M. Henriksen,HJ, van der Keur,P. and 
Mysiak,J. 2009. Uncertainty in adaptive water 
management. Concepts and Guidelines. Report 
Newater Project.  
URL: www.newater.uni-
osnabrueck.de/index.php?pid=1045 

 

Abstract 

Much has already been discussed in connection with uncertainty in scientific and decision-making arenas. Increasingly, 
this topic has become unavoidable  for policy makers, manager practitioners and the various stakeholders involved in 
water management. At the same time, uncertainty has also been subject to numerous scientific studies, triggering new 
developments  and  theories.  However,  despite  the  great  advances  and  growing  awareness  in  respect  of  uncertainty, 
coping  with  it  in  areas  such  as  water  resource  management  still  constitutes  a  notably  problematic  issue,  posing 
significant challenges for decision making. Finding themselves faced with a Babylonian confusion, decision makers are 
left with the responsibility of identifying an appropriate response to uncertainty in a world where many different – and 
sometimes contradictory – strategies exist for doing so. 

The  following  “uncertainty  guidelines”  specifically  address  the  topic  of  uncertainty  in  adaptive  water  management. 
Taking a practical stand, these guidelines also aim to enhance the appreciation of uncertainty and its implications for 
water policy-making and management practice. In this way, we hope to contribute not only to raising awareness of the 
multiple sources, types and impacts of uncertainty, but also to providing decision makers with effective strategies and 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

Brugnach, M., A. Dewulf, C. Pahl-Wostl, and T. 
Taillieu. 2008. Toward a relational concept of 
uncertainty: about knowing too little, knowing too 
differently, and accepting not to know. Ecology and 
Society 13(2): 30. [online] URL: 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol13/iss2/art30/ 

Borsuk et al. 2001. Stakeholder Values and Scientific 
Modeling in the Neuse River Watershed. Group 
Decision Making and Negotiation. 10: 355-373.   

Stow et al, 2002.  Nitrogen TDML development in the 
Neuse River Watershed: An imperative for Adaptive 
Management. Journal of Contemporary Water 
Research and Education.  22(1), 16-26. 

Caves, J. K., G. S. Bodner, K. Simms, L. A. Fisher, and 

instruments for handling uncertainty in an adaptive way. 

Uncertainty of late has become an increasingly important and controversial topic in water resource management, and 
natural  resources  management  in  general.  Diverse  managing  goals,  changing  environmental  conditions,  conflicting 
interests, and lack of predictability are some of the characteristics that decision makers have to face. This has resulted 
in  the  application  and  development  of  strategies  such  as  adaptive  management,  which  proposes  flexibility  and 
capability  to  adapt  to  unknown  conditions  as  a  way  of  dealing  with  uncertainties.  However,  this  shift  in  ideas  about 
managing has not always been accompanied by a general shift in the way uncertainties are understood and handled. To 
improve this situation, we believe it is necessary to recontextualize uncertainty in a broader way—relative to its role, 
meaning, and relationship with participants in decision making—because it  is from this understanding that problems 
and solutions emerge. Under this view, solutions do not exclusively consist of eliminating or reducing uncertainty, but 
of  reframing  the  problems  as  such  so  that  they  convey  a  different  meaning.  To  this  end,  we  propose  a  relational 
approach to uncertainty analysis. Here, we elaborate on this new conceptualization of uncertainty, and indicate some 
implications of this view for strategies for dealing with uncertainty in water management. We present an example as an 
illustration of these concepts. 

In  1998,  the  North  Carolina  Legislature  mandated  a  30%  reduction  in  the  nitrogen  loading  in  the  Neuse  River  in  an 
attempt  to  reduce  undesirable  environmental  conditions  in  the  lower  river  and  estuary.  Although  sophisticated 
scientific models of the Neuse estuary exist, there is currently no study directly relating the nitrogen reduction policy to 
the concerns of the estuarine system’s stakeholders. Much of the difficulty lies in the fact that existing scientific models 
have biophysical outcome variables, such as dissolved oxygen, that are typically not directly meaningful to the public. In 
addition,  stakeholders  have  concerns  related  to  economics,  modeling,  implementation,  and  fairness  that  go  beyond 
ecological  outcomes.  We  describe  a  decision-analytic  approach  to  modeling  the  Neuse  River  nutrient-management 
problem,  focusing  on  linking  scientific  assessments  to  stakeholder  objectives.  The  first  step  in  the  approach  is 
elicitation and analysis of stakeholder concerns.  The second step is construction of a probabilistic model that relates 
proposed management actions to attributes of interest to stakeholders. We discuss how the model can then be used 
by local decision makers as a tool for adaptive management of the Neuse River system. This discussion relates adaptive 
management  to  the  notion  of  expected  value  of  information  and  indicates  a  need  for  a  comprehensive  monitoring 
program to  accompany implementation of the model. We conclude by acknowledging that a  scientific  model cannot 
appropriately address all the stakeholder concerns elicited, and we discuss how the remaining concerns may otherwise 
be considered in the policy process 

 

Nicht vorhanden 

There is growing recognition that public lands cannot be managed as islands; rather, land management must address 
the  ecological,  social,  and  temporal  complexity  that  often  spans  jurisdictions  and  traditional  planning  horizons. 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

T. Robertson. 2013. Integrating collaboration, 
adaptive management, and scenario-planning: 
experiences at Las Cienegas National Conservation 
Area. Ecology and Society 18(3): 43. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-05749-180343 

Rowland, E.R., Cross, M.S., Hartmann, H. (2014) 
Considering Multiple Futures: Scenario Planning to 
Address Uncertainty in Natural Resource 
Conservation. Washington, DC: US Fish and Wildlife 
Service. 

Plummer, R., B. Crona, D. R. Armitage, P. Olsson, M. 
Tengö, and O. Yudina. 2012. Adaptive 
comanagement: a systematic review and analysis. 
Ecology and Society 17(3): 11. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-04952-170311 

Collaborative  decision  making  and  adaptive  management  (CAM)  have  been  promoted  as  methods  to  reconcile 
competing  societal  demands  and  respond  to  complex  ecosystem  dynamics.  We  detail  the  experiences  of  land 
managers  and  stakeholders  in  using  CAM  at  Las  Cienegas  National  Conservation  Area  (LCNCA),  a  highly  valued  site 
under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). The CAM process at Las Cienegas is marked by strong 
stakeholder engagement, with four core elements: (1) shared watershed goals with measurable resource objectives; (2) 
relevant and reliable scientific information; (3) mechanisms to incorporate new information into decision making; and 
(4)  shared  learning  to  improve  both  the  process  and  management  actions.  The  combination  of  stakeholder 
engagement  and  adaptive  management  has  led  to  agreement  on  contentious  issues,  more  innovative  solutions,  and 
more effective land management. However, the region is now experiencing rapid changes outside managers’ control, 
including  climate  change,  human  population  growth,  and  reduced  federal  budgets,  with  large  but  unpredictable 
impacts on natural resources. Although the CAM experience provides a strong foundation for making the difficult and 
contentious  management  decisions  that  such  changes  are  likely  to  require,  neither  collaboration  nor  adaptive 
management  provides  a  sufficient  structure  for  addressing  the  externalities  that  drive  uncontrollable  and 
unpredictable  change.  As  a  result,  LCNCA  is  exploring  two  specific  modifications  to  CAM  that  may  better  address 
emerging  challenges,  including:  (1)  creating  nested  resource  objectives  to  distinguish  between  those  objectives  that 
may be crucial to maintaining ecological resilience from those that may hinder a flexible response to climate change, 
and (2) incorporating scenario planning into CAM to explore how climate change may interact with other drivers and 
alter options for the future, to identify robust management actions, and to prioritize ecological monitoring efforts. The 
experiences at LCNCA demonstrate how collaboration and adaptive  management  can be used to improve  social and 
environmental  outcomes  and,  with  modifications,  may  help  address  the  full  range  of  complexity  and  change  that 
threatens to overwhelm even the best efforts to sustain public lands. 

 

Nicht vorhanden 

This  paper  outlines  the  results  of  a  systematic  review  of  the  literature  on  adaptive  comanagement  (ACM).  Adaptive 
comanagement  is  an  emergent  governance  approach  for  complex  social–ecological  systems  that  links  the  learning 
function of adaptive management (experimental and experiential) and the linking (vertically and horizontally) function 
of  comanagement.  Given  the  rapid  growth  of  adaptive  comanagement  scholarship,  there  is  value  in  a  systematic 
analysis  of  how  the  concept  is  being  conceptualized  to  elucidate  agreement  and  discrepancies  and  to  examine  the 
challenges  this  presents  for  cross-case  comparisons  and  the  possibility  of  arriving  at  more  generalizable  insights.  A 
synthesis-based  methodology  has  been  developed  involving  a  comprehensive  search  and  screening  of  academic 
databases and the internet. A detailed analysis of 108 documents was undertaken to characterize the state of the ACM 
literature,  unpack  the  construct  of  ACM,  and  examine  relationships  among  aspects  of  ACM  based  on  accumulated 
experiences  to  date.  The  systematic  review  and  analysis  reveals  imprecision,  inconsistency,  and  confusion  with  the 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

Stringer, L. C., A. J. Dougill, E. Fraser, K. Hubacek, C. 
Prell, and M. S. Reed. 2006. Unpacking 
“participation” in the adaptive management of 
social–ecological systems: a critical review. Ecology 
and Society 11(2): 39. [online] URL: 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss2/art39/ 

Adler J.H. 'Water Marketing as an Adaptive Response 
to the Threat of Climate Change', Hamline Law 
Review, 31 (1), 730-54. 

Grafton R.Q., G. Libecap, S. Mcglennon, C. Landry 
and B. O’brien (2011), 'An Integrated Assessment of 
Water Markets: A Cross-Country Comparison', 
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 5 (2), 
219-39 

Loch, A, Wheeler, S, Bjornlund, H, Beecham, S, 
Edwards, J, Zuo and Shanahan, M 2013 The role of 
water markets in climate change adaptation, 
National Climate Change Adaptation Research 
Facility, Gold Coast. pp.142 

Heilmann S (2008) Policy experimentation in China’s 
economic rise. Stud Comp Int Dev 43:1–26.  
doi:10.1007/s12116-007-9014-4. 

concept. Robust evidentiary insights into how the variables or components of ACM interrelate as well as relate to goals 
and outcomes are, therefore, presently not possible. These findings lead to the discussion of a series of challenges for 
ACM  scholarship.  Opportunities  remain  for  ACM  scholars  to  pursue  theoretical  development  in  rigorous  ways  that 
facilitate empirically based cross-site comparisons. 

Adaptive  management  has  the  potential  to  make  environmental  management  more  democratic  through  the 
involvement of different  stakeholders. In this article, we examine three case studies  at different scales that followed 
adaptive  management  processes,  critically  reflecting  upon  the  role  of  stakeholder  participation  in  each  case. 
Specifically,  we  examine  at  which  stages  different  types  of  stakeholders  can  play  key  roles  and  the  ways  that  each 
might  be  involved.  We  show  that  a  range  of  participatory  mechanisms  can  be  employed  at  different  stages  of  the 
adaptive  cycle,  and  can  work  together  to  create  conditions  for  social  learning  and  favorable  outcomes  for  diverse 
stakeholders. This analysis highlights the need for greater reflection on case study research in order  to further refine 
participatory processes within adaptive management. This should not only address the shortcomings and successes of 
adaptive management as a form of democratic environmental governance, but should also unpack the links between 
science, institutions, knowledge, and power. 

 

Nicht vorhanden 

 

Nicht vorhanden 

 

Nicht vorhanden 

Policy  experimentation  is  frequently  highlighted  as  a  potent  means  to  facilitate  institutional  innovation,  and  avoid 
reformist leaps in the dark by injecting bottom-up initiative and local knowledge into the national policy process. Yet 
experimentation remains a surprisingly vague concept in the debate over variants of economic governance. This article 
contributes to the study of experiment-based policymaking by examining the distinctive tools, processes, and effects of 
experimental  programs  in  major  domains  of  China’s  economic  reform.  China’s  experience  attests  to  the  potency  of 
experimentation in bringing about transformative change, even in a rigid authoritarian, bureaucratic environment, and 
regardless  of  strong  political  opposition.  Large-scale  experimentation  stimulated  policy  learning  and  economic 
expansion effectively in those sectors in which political elites could benefit from supporting new types of private and 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

Xia,C. and Pahl-Wostl, C. 2012. The development of 
water allocation management in the Yellow River 
Basin. Water Resources Management.  26(12): 3395–
3414. doi: 10.1007/s11269-012-0078-1. 

Richter et al 2006. A collaborative and adaptive 
process for developing environmental flow 
recommendations. River Research and Application, 
22: 297-318.  

transnational  entrepreneurial  activity.  Conversely,  experimental  programs  largely  failed  in  generating  an  effective 
provision  of  social  goods  which  would  require  a  combination  of  active  societal  supervision  and  strict  central 
government enforcement to make it work. Though the impact of reform experiments varies between policy domains, 
China’s experimentation-based policy process has been essential to redefining basic policy parameters. At the heart of 
this process, we find a pattern of central–local interaction in generating policy—“experimentation under hierarchy”—
which  constitutes  a  notable  addition  to  the  repertoires  of  governance  that  have  been  tried  for  achieving  economic 
transformation. 

For decades, the Chinese government has been searching for solutions to cope with the increasing imbalance between 
the  supply  and  demand  of  water  in  the  Yellow  River  Basin.  This  paper  aims  at  a  better  understanding  of  the 
development  of  the  water  allocation  regime  in  the  Yellow  River  Basin  between  1950  and  2009,  introducing  a  fresh 
perspective based on the notion of “regime transition”. Accordingly, we investigated 1) whether socalled “Windows of 
Opportunity  for  Transition  (WOPTs)”  emerged,  triggering  a  transition,  and  whether  WOPT(s)  resulted  in  a  stable 
transition towards the new regime; 2) how informal learning processes and epistemic communities have contributed to 
the  regime  change.  We  adapted  Kingdon’s  “multiple  stream  model”  and  identified  four  WOPTs  from  the  1950s, 
analyzing  the  reconfiguration  process  of  the  regime  after  the  onset  of  the  transition.  Our  examples  of  two  types  of 
informal learning processes demonstrate their  contribution to the creation of WOPTs  and the reconfiguration of the 
regime.  Furthermore,  this  study  indicates,  in  a  qualitative  manner,  how  epistemic  communities  contribute  to  the 
knowledge base of the regime, and thus to its development. Finally, we have provided a general insight into the further 
development of the water allocation regime and highlighted potential avenues for further studies. 

Many river restoration projects are focusing on restoring environmental flow regimes to improve ecosystem health in 
rivers  that  have  been  developed  for  water  supply,  hydropower  generation,  flood  control,  navigation,  and  other 
purposes.  In  efforts  to  prevent  future  ecological  damage,  water  supply  planners  in  some  parts  of  the  world  are 
beginning  to  address  the  water  needs  of  river  ecosystems  proactively  by  reserving  some  portion  of  river  flows  for 
ecosystem support. These restorative and protective actions require development of scientifically credible estimates of 
environmental  flow  needs.  This  paper  describes  an  adaptive,  inter-disciplinary,  science-based  process  for  developing 
environmental  flow  recommendations.  It  has  been  designed  for  use  in  a  variety  of  water  management  activities, 
including  flow  restoration  projects,  and  can  be  tailored  according  to  available  time  and  resources  for  determining 
environmental  flow  needs.  The  five-step  process  includes:  (1)  an  orientation  meeting;  (2)  a  literature  review  and 
summary  of  existing  knowledge  about  flow-dependent  biota  and  ecological  processes  of  concern;  (3)  a  workshop  to 
develop ecological objectives and initial flow recommendations, and identify key information gaps; (4) implementation 
of the flow recommendations on a trial basis to test hypotheses and reduce uncertainties; and (5) monitoring system 
response  and  conducting  further  research  as  warranted.  A  range  of  recommended  flows  are  developed  for  the  low 
flows  in  each  month,  high  flow  pulses  throughout  the  year,  and  floods  with  targeted  inter-annual  frequencies.  We 
describe  an  application  of  this  process  to  the  Savannah  River,  in  which  the  resultant  flow  recommendations  were 
incorporated  into  a  comprehensive  river  basin  planning  process  conducted  by  the  Corps  of  Engineers,  and  used  to 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

Camacho, Alejandro E. and Susskind, Lawrence E. 
and Schenk, Todd, (2010). Collaborative Planning and 
Adaptive Management in Glen Canyon: A Cautionary 
Tale. Columbia Journal of Environmental Law, Vol. 
35, No. 1;  Available at 
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1572720 

Gunderson and Light. 2006. Adaptive management 
and adaptive governance in the everglades 
ecosystem. Policy Science, 39:323–334 

initiate the adaptive management of Thurmond Dam. 

The  Glen  Canyon  Dam  Adaptive  Management  Program  (AMP)  has  been  identified  as  a  model  for  natural  resource 
management.  We  challenge  that  assertion,  citing  the  lack  of  progress  toward  a  long-term  management  plan  for  the 
dam, sustained extra-programmatic conflict, and a downriver ecology that is still in jeopardy, despite over ten years of 
meetings and an expensive research program. We have examined the primary and secondary sources available on the 
AMP’s  design  and  operation  in  light  of  best  practices  identified  in  the  literature  on  adaptive  management  and 
collaborative  decision-making.  We  have  identified  six  shortcomings:  (1)  an  inadequate  approach  to  identifying 
stakeholders; (2) a failure to provide clear goals and involve stakeholders in establishing the operating procedures that 
guide the collaborative process; (3) inappropriate use of professional neutrals and a failure to cultivate consensus; (4) a 
failure  to  establish  and  follow  clear  joint  fact-finding  procedures;  (5)  a  failure  to  produce  functional  written 
agreements;  and  (6)  a  failure  to  manage  the  AMP  adaptively  and  cultivate  long-term  problem-solving  capacity. 
Adaptive  management  can  be  an  effective  approach  for  addressing  complex  ecosystem-related  processes  like  the 
operation  of  the  Glen  Canyon  Dam,  particularly  in  the  face  of  substantial  complexity,  uncertainty,  and  political 
contentiousness. However, the Glen Canyon Dam AMP shows that a stated commitment to collaboration and adaptive 
management is insufficient. Effective management of natural resources can only be realized through careful attention 
to the collaborative design and implementation of appropriate problem-solving and adaptive-management procedures. 
It  also  requires  the  development  of  an  appropriate  organizational  infrastructure  that promotes  stakeholder  dialogue 
and agency learning. Though the experimental Glen Canyon Dam AMP is far from a success of collaborative adaptive 
management, the lessons from its shortcomings can foster more effective collaborative adaptive management in the 
future by Congress, federal agencies, and local and state authorities. 

The Everglades is an intensively managed  ecosystem  where control of the  water has allowed agricultural,  urban and 
economic development, while struggling to meet biodiversity conservation goals. The over 100 year history of control 
began in response to a disastrous series of floods and droughts followed by environmental crises at an ecosystem scale. 
Each of these events precipitated technological fixes that extended control of water resources. Institutional structures 
have  been  continually  reorganized  over  the  last  century  to  meet  shifting  social  objectives,  the  latest  of  which  is 
ecosystem restoration. However, the basic response, which employs engineering and technological solutions, is a type 
of social trap, where governmental mandates, planning-based paradigms and vested interests all interact to inhibit the 
resolution of chronic environmental issues. Experience from other resource systems indicates that in such an inherently 
complex  system  wrought  with  multiple  uncertainties,  restoration  must  be  discovered  through  experimentation  and 
learning embraced by adaptive management. Though minimal steps towards adaptive management have been made, 
we argue that adaptive forms of experimentation and governance are needed to resolve  chronic resource issues and 
achieve restoration goals. 

LoSchiavo, A. J., R. G. Best, R. E. Burns, S. Gray, M. C. 
Harwell, E. B. Hines, A. R. McLean, T. St. Clair, S. 
Traxler, and J. W. Vearil. 2013. Lessons learned from 

Although  few  successful  examples  of  large-scale  adaptive  management  applications  are  available  to  ecosystem 
restoration scientists and managers, examining where and how the components of an adaptive management program 
have been successfully implemented yields insight into what approaches have and have not worked. We document five 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

the first decade of adaptive management in 
comprehensive Everglades restoration. Ecology and 
Society 18(4): 70. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-
06065-180470 

Convertino M., C.M. Foran, J.M. Keisler, L. Scarlett, A. 
Loschiavo, G.A. Kiker and I. Linkov (2013), 'Enhanced 
Adaptive Management: Integrating Decision Analysis, 
Scenario Analysis and Environmental Modeling for 
the Everglades', Sci. Rep., 3 

Mendez et al, 2013. Facilitating transitional 
processes in rigid institutional regimes for water 
management and wetland conservation: experience 
from the Guadalquivir Estuary. Ecology and Society 
17(1): 26. 

key  lessons  learned  during  the  decadelong  development  and  implementation  of  the  Comprehensive  Everglades 
Restoration  Plan  (CERP)  Collaborative  Adaptive  Management  Program  that  might  be  useful  to  other  adaptive 
management  practitioners.  First,  legislative  and  regulatory  authorities  that  require  the  development  of  an  adaptive 
management program are necessary to maintain funding and support to set up and implement adaptive management. 
Second,  integration  of  adaptive  management  activities  into  existing  institutional  processes,  and  development  of 
technical guidance, helps to ensure that adaptive management activities are understood and roles and responsibilities 
are  clearly  articulated  so  that  adaptive  management  activities  are  implemented  successfully.  Third,  a  strong  applied 
science framework is critical for establishing a prerestoration ecosystem reference condition and understanding of how 
the  system  works,  as  well  as  for  providing  a  conduit  for  incorporating  new  scientific  information  into  the  decision-
making process. Fourth, clear identification of uncertainties that pose risks to meeting restoration goals helps with the 
development  of  hypothesis-driven  strategies  to  inform  restoration  planning  and  implementation.  Tools  such  as 
management options matrices can provide a coherent way to link hypotheses to specific monitoring efforts and options 
to  adjust  implementation  if  performance  goals  are  not  achieved.  Fifth,  independent  external  peer  review  of  an 
adaptive  management  program  provides  important  feedback  critical  to  maintaining  and  improving  adaptive 
management implementation for ecosystem restoration. These lessons learned have helped shape the CERP Adaptive 
Management Program and are applicable to other natural resource management and restoration efforts; they can be 
used to help guide development and implementation of adaptive management programs facing similar challenges. 

We propose to enhance existing adaptive management efforts with a decision-analytical approach that can guide the 
initial selection of robust restoration alternative plans and inform the need to adjust these alternatives in the course of 
action based on continuously acquired monitoring  information and changing  stakeholder values. We demonstrate an 
application of enhanced adaptive management for a wetland restoration case study inspired by the Florida Everglades 
restoration  effort.  We  find  that  alternatives  designed  to  reconstruct  the  pre-drainage  flow  may  have  a  positive 
ecological impact, but may also have high operational costs and only marginally contribute to meeting other objectives 
such  as  reduction  of  flooding.  Enhanced  adaptive  management  allows  managers  to  guide  investment  in  ecosystem 
modeling  and  monitoring  efforts  through  scenario  and  value  of  information  analyses  to  support  optimal  restoration 
strategies in the face of uncertain and changing information. 

Traditional  policies  for  water  resources  management  and  wetland  conservation  are  often  based  on  command-and- 
control approaches. The latter tend to drive the human–wetland–water system into pathological states, characterized 
by more vulnerable ecosystems and rigid institutions for governance. The overcoming of these states may rest in the 
development of flexible and adaptive institutional regimes that rely on adaptive governance and management. Because 
past factors might constrain the implementation of more flexible adaptive approaches to management, it is important 
to understand the historical mechanisms underlying the genesis of institutional rigidity. We first present the results of a 
historical analysis of Doñana, which  can be  characterized  as a  pathological water socio-ecosystem  governed through 
rigid institutional regimes for water resources management and wetland conservation. In a second step, we analyze the 
advances achieved during a recent, large-scale restoration program for the Doñana wetlands, which adhered explicitly 
to the tenets of adaptive management. Our analysis indicated that the historical persistence of command-and-control 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

Michael C. Runge (2011) An Introduction to Adaptive 
Management for Threatened and Endangered 
Species. Journal of Fish and Wildlife Management: 
December 2011, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 220-233. 

doi/abs/10.3996/082011-JFWM-045 

Tyre AJ, Peterson JT, Converse SJ, Bogich T, Miller D, 
Post van der Burg M, Thomas C, Thompson R, Wood 
J, Brewer DC, Runge MC. 2011. Adaptive 
management of bull trout populations in the Lemhi 
Basin. Journal of Fish and Wildlife Management 
2(2):262–281; e1944-687X. doi: 10.3996/022011-
JFWM-012 

approaches has been a path-dependent process that led to the emergence of a rigid institutional regime and caused it 
to  enter  a  rigidity  trap.  However,  the  achievements  of  the  restoration  program  suggest  that  a  more  flexible  and 
adaptive regime could be developed through the introduction of adaptive management at the operational levels, using 
specifically tailored action research programs. To conclude, we speculate that the research strategy outlined could be 
extended to comply with, or complement, the requirements of the EU's Water Framework Directive in other European 
water socio-ecosystems. 

Management  of threatened  and endangered  species would seem to be a  perfect context  for adaptive management. 
Many  of  the  decisions  are  recurrent  and  plagued  by  uncertainty,  exactly  the  conditions  that  warrant  an  adaptive 
approach. But  although the potential of adaptive  management  in these  settings has been extolled, there are limited 
applications  in  practice.  The  impediments  to  practical  implementation  are  manifold  and  include  semantic  confusion, 
institutional  inertia,  misperceptions  about  the  suitability  and  utility,  and  a  lack  of  guiding  examples.  In  this  special 
section  of  the  Journal  of  Fish  and  Wildlife  Management,  we  hope  to  reinvigorate  the  appropriate  application  of 
adaptive  management  for  threatened  and  endangered  species  by  framing  such  management  in  a  decision-analytical 
context, clarifying misperceptions, classifying the types of decisions that might be amenable to an adaptive approach, 
and providing three fully developed case studies. In this overview paper, I define terms, review the past application of 
adaptive management, challenge perceived hurdles, and set the stage for the case studies which follow. 

The  bull  trout  Salvelinus  confluentus,  a  stream-living  salmonid  distributed  in  drainages  of  the  northwestern  United 
States,  is  listed  as  threatened  under  the  Endangered  Species  Act  because  of  rangewide  declines.  One  proposed 
recovery  action  is  the  reconnection  of  tributaries  in  the  Lemhi  Basin.  Past  water  use  policies  in  this  core  area 
disconnected  headwater  spawning  sites  from  downstream  habitat  and  have  led  to  the  loss  of  migratory  life  history 
forms. We developed an adaptive management framework to analyze which types of streams should be prioritized for 
reconnection under a proposed Habitat Conservation Plan. We developed a Stochastic Dynamic Program that identified 
optimal policies over time under four different assumptions about the nature of the migratory behavior and the effects 
of brook trout Salvelinus fontinalis on subpopulations of bull trout. In general, given the current state of the system and 
the uncertainties about the dynamics, the optimal policy would be to connect streams that are currently occupied by 
bull trout. We also estimated the value of information as the difference between absolute certainty about which of our 
four assumptions were correct, and a model averaged optimization assuming no knowledge. Overall there is little to be 
gained  by  learning  about  the  dynamics  of  the  system  in  its  current  state,  although  in  other  parts  of  the  state  space 
reducing uncertainties about the system would be very valuable. We also conducted a sensitivity analysis; the optimal 
decision  at  the  current  state  does  not  change  even  when  parameter  values  are  changed  up  to  75%  of  the  baseline 
values. Overall, the exercise  demonstrates that it is possible to apply adaptive management  principles to threatened 
and endangered species, but logistical and data availability constraints make detailed analyses difficult. 

Cosens, B. A., and M. K. Williams. 2012. Resilience 
and water governance: adaptive governance in the 
Columbia River basin. Ecology and Society 17(4): 3 

The 1964 Columbia River Treaty between the United States and Canada is currently under review. Under the treaty, the 
river is jointly operated by the two countries for hydropower and is the largest producer of hydropower in the western 
hemisphere. In considering the next phase of international river governance, the degree of uncertainty surrounding the 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

Lawrence J., A. Reisinger, B. Mullan and B. Jackson 
(2013), 'Exploring climate change uncertainties to 
support adaptive management of changing flood-
risk', Environmental Science & Policy, 33, 133-42.  

Schuetze, T. and Chelleri, L. (2013) Integrating 
Decentralized Rainwater Management in Urban 
Planning and Design: Flood Resilient and Sustainable 
Water Management Using the Example of Coastal 
Cities in The Netherlands and Taiwan. Water 2013, 5, 
593-616; doi:10.3390/w5020593 

drivers  of  change  complicates  efforts  to  predict  and  manage  under  traditional  approaches  that  rely  on  historical 
ecosystem  responses.  At  the  same  time,  changes  in  social  values  have  focused  attention  on  ecosystem  health,  the 
decline  of  which  has  led  to  the  listing  of  seven  salmon  and  four  steelhead  populations  under  the  U.S.  Endangered 
Species  Act.  Although  adaptive  management  is  considered  one  approach  to  resource  management  in  the  face  of 
uncertainty, an early attempt at its implementation in the U.S. portion of the basin failed. We explore these issues in 
the context of resilience, taking the position that while adaptive management may foster ecological resilience, it is only 
one factor in the institutional changes needed to foster social-ecological resilience captured in the concept of adaptive 
governance. 

Increasing intensity and frequency of extreme precipitation events projected as a consequence of global warming pose 
significant challenges for decision-making. Climate change creates a dynamic risk, but flood risk management decision-
making  based  on  single  ‘best  estimate’  scenarios  is  entrenched  within  decision-making  frameworks  and  professional 
operating  practices.  This  conceals  uncertainties  and  focuses  attention  on  enhancements  to  existing  ‘protection’ 
structures,  giving  a  false  sense  of  security  to  those  living  within  presumed  ‘safe’  areas.  A  more  nuanced,  risk-based 
approach to flood frequency changes is needed to reflect climate change uncertainties, but this is constrained by the 
high  cost  and  complexity  of  modelling.  We  present  a  quick  and  relatively  low-cost  methodology  to  explore  the 
implications of alternative climate change scenarios for flood frequency, and apply it for illustrative purposes, to the 
Hutt River located in New Zealand’s lower North Island. Annual exceedance probabilities increase  under all scenarios 
but  with  considerable  differences  between  alternative  emissions  scenarios  and  climate  models.  We  evaluated  the 
salience of this information for planning responses with flood management and planning practi- tioners. We found that 
‘mind-sets’ changed to consider a greater range of response options according to their lock-in potential in existing and 
Greenfield urban settlements. Tools to rapidly explore alternative futures can therefore support evaluation of a wider 
range of response options at the exploratory stages of decision-making, which helps avoid planning responses that are 
predicated on historical experience and a single ‘best estimate 

Urbanized  delta  areas  worldwide  share  a  growing  tendency  of  exposure  to  water  stress  induced  by  the  effects  of 
climate  change  and  anthropogenic  factors,  threatening  the  operation  of  infrastructure  systems  and  future  urban 
development. The important synergistic impacts coexisting with freshwater scarcity are increasing urbanization rates, 
subsiding  soils,  saltwater  intrusion  in  aquifers  and  rivers,  coastal  erosion,  and  increased  flooding.  Innovative  design 
strategies  and  concepts  for  the  integration  of  decentralized  rainwater  management  measures  can  contribute  to  the 
integrated and climate resilient planning of urban spaces that are threatened by climate change scenarios that worsen 
the security of urban infrastructures and the future availability of fresh water. Decentralized  rainwater management, 
including retention, storage, and reuse strategies that are integrated into spatial planning and urban design, can reduce 
flood risks while simultaneously enhancing freshwater availability. This paper discusses a paradigm shift in urban water 
management, from centralized to decentralized management (that is, from threats to opportunities), using the example 
of  two  case  studies.  Concepts  and  strategies  for  building  climate  resilient  cities,  which  address  flood  control,  the 
protection  of  freshwater  resources,  and  the  harmonization  of  a  natural  and  more  sustainable  water  balance,  are 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

Temperli C., H. Bugmann and C. Elkin (2012), 
'Adaptive management for competing forest goods 
and services under climate change', Ecological 
Applications, 22 (8), 2065-77. 

Allan C, Curtis A. 2005. Nipped in the bud: why 
regional scale adaptive management is not blooming. 
Environmental Management 36:414–425. 

presented for Almere (Rhine Schelde Delta, The Netherlands) and Hsingchu (Dotzpu Delta, Taiwan). 

Developing  adaptive  forest  management  strategies  is  essential  to  maintain  the  provisioning  of  forest  goods  and 
services  (FGS)  under  future  climate  change.  We  assessed  how  climate  change  and  forest  management  affect  forest 
development  and  FGS  for  a  diverse  casestudy  landscape  in  Central  Europe.  Using  a  process-based  forest  model 
(LandClim) we simulated forest dynamics and FGS under a range of climate change and management scenarios in the 
Black  Forest,  Germany,  which  is  shaped  by  various  management  practices.  We  focused  on  the  interdependencies 
between timber production and forest diversity, the most valued FGS in this region. We found that the conversion to 
more  drought-adapted  forest  types  is  required  to  prevent  climate  change-induced  forest  dieback  and  that  this 
conversion  must  be  the  target  of  any  adaptive  management,  especially  in  areas  where  monocultures  of  drought-
sensitive Norway spruce (Picea abies) were promoted in the past. Forest conversion takes up to 120 years,  however, 
with  past  and  future  adaptive  management  being  the  key  drivers  of  timber  and  forest  diversity  provision.  The 
conversion of drought-sensitive conifer monocultures maintains  timber production in the  short term and enhances a 
range of forest diversity indices. Using uneven-aged forest management that targets a drought-adapted, diverse, and 
resilient  species  mixture,  high  species  diversity  can  be  combined  with  timber  production  in  the  long  term.  Yet,  the 
promotion  of  mature-stand  attributes  requires  management  restrictions.  Selecting  future  adaptive  management 
options  thus  implies  the  consideration  of  trade-offs  between  forest  resource  use  and  environmental  objectives,  but 
also  the  exploitation  of  synergies  between  FGS  that  occur  during  forest  conversion.  Lastly,  the  large  impact  of  past 
management practices on the spatial heterogeneity of forest dynamics underpins the need to assess FGS provisioning 
at the landscape scale. 

is  an  approach  to  managing  natural  resources  that  emphasizes 

Adaptive  management 
learning  from  the 
implementation  of  policies  and  strategies.  Adaptive  management  appears  to  offer  a  solution  to  the  management 
gridlock caused by increasing complexity and uncertainty. The concept of adaptive management has been embraced by 
natural resource managers worldwide, but there are relatively few published examples of adaptive management in use. 
In  this  article,  we  explore  two  watershed  management  projects  in  southeastern  Australia  to  better  understand  the 
potential of adaptive management in regional scale programs through qualitative, case study–based investigation. The 
program  logic  of  one  case  implies  the  use  of  passive  adaptive  management,  whereas  the  second  case  claims  to  be 
based  on  active  adaptive  management.  Data  were  created  using  participant  observation,  semistructured  interviews 
with individuals and groups, and document review. Using thematic content and metaphor analysis to explore the case 
data,  we  found  that  each  case  was  successful  as  an  implementation  project.  However,  the  use  of  both  passive  and 
active  adaptive  management  was  constrained  by  deeply  entrenched  social  norms  and  institutional  frameworks.  We 
identified seven ``imperatives'' that guided the behaviour of project stakeholders, and that have consequences for the 
use  of  adaptive  management.  Reference  to  recent  evaluations  of  the  Adaptive  Management  Areas  of  the  Pacific 
Northwest  of  the  United  States  suggests  that  some  of  these  imperatives  and  their  consequences  have  broad 
applicability.  The  implications  of  our  findings  are  discussed,  and  suggestions  for  improving  the  outcomes  of  regional 
scale adaptive management are provided 

Claudia Pahl-Wostl, 24. Oktober 2014 

Allen C.R. and L.H. Gunderson (2011), 'Pathology and 
failure in the design and implementation of adaptive 
management', Journal of Environmental 
Management, 92 (5), 1379-84 

 

The  conceptual  underpinnings  for  adaptive  management  are  simple;  there  will  always  be  inherent  uncertainty  and 
unpredictability in the dynamics and behavior of complex ecological systems as a result non-linear interactions among 
components and emergence, yet management decisions must still be made. The strength of adaptive management is in 
the  recognition  and  confrontation  of  such  uncertainty.  Rather  than  ignore  uncertainty,  or  use  it  to  preclude 
management actions, adaptive management can foster resilience and flexibility to cope with an uncertain future, and 
develop  safe  to  fail  management  approaches  that  acknowledge  inevitable  changes  and  surprises.  Since  its  initial 
introduction,  adaptive  management  has  been  hailed  as  a  solution  to  endless  trial  and  error  approaches  to  complex 
natural  resource  management  challenges.  However,  its  implementation  has  failed  more  often  than  not.  It  does  not 
produce  easy  answers,  and  it  is  appropriate  in  only  a  subset  of  natural  resource  management  problems.  Clearly 
adaptive  management  has  great  potential  when  applied  appropriately.  Just  as  clearly  adaptive  management  has 
seemingly failed to live up to its high expectations. Why? We outline nine pathologies and challenges that can lead to 
failure in adaptive management programs. We focus on  general sources of failures in adaptive management, so that 
others can avoid these pitfalls in the future. Adaptive management can be a powerful and beneficial tool when applied 
correctly to appropriate  management  problems; the challenge is to keep the concept  of adaptive management  from 
being hijacked for inappropriate use. 

