EXILE AND TRANSATLANTIC INTELLECTUAL TRANSFER

CRITICAL THEORY IN THE UNITED STATES

COURSE NO.: 7.110117, MODULE ANG-F2, -F3 & -L3; X-LKE-1, -2, -5 & -6

WS 2014/2015

MONDAYS, 14:00 - 16:00

ROOM: 41/105

Jatin Wagle
Tel.: 0541-969-6033               
Email: jatin.wagle@uni-osnabrueck.de 

 

Ofﬁce hours: Tuesdays, 11:00-12:00

          

1

ANGELUS NOVUS: THE ANGEL OF HISTORY

• “A Klee painting named ‘Angelus Novus’ shows an angel 
looking  as  though  he  is  about  to  move  away  from 
something  he  is  ﬁxedly  contemplating.  His  eyes  are 
staring,  his  mouth  is  open,  his  wings  are  spread. This  is 
how one pictures the angel of history. His face is turned 
toward the past. Where we perceive a chain of events, he 
sees one single catastrophe which keeps piling wreckage 
and hurls it in front of his feet. The angel would like to 
stay, awaken the dead, and make whole what has been 
smashed. But a storm is blowing in from Paradise; it has 
got  caught  in  his  wings  with  such  a  violence  that  the 
angel  can  no  longer  close  them. The  storm  irresistibly 
propels him into the future to which his back is turned, 
while the pile of debris before him grows skyward. This 
storm is what we call progress.”

• From Walter Benjamin, “On the Concept of History”

2

•

Über den Begriff der Geschichte. These IX

Mein Flügel ist zum Schwung bereit 
ich kehrte gern zurück 
denn blieb ich auch lebendige Zeit 
ich hätte wenig Glück 
Gerhard Scholem, “Gruß vom Angelus”

                       Es gibt ein Bild von Klee, das Angelus Novus heißt. Ein Engel 
ist darauf dargestellt, der aussieht, als wäre er im Begriff, sich von etwas zu 
entfernen,  worauf  er  starrt.  Seine Augen  sind  aufgerissen,  sein  Mund  steht 
offen und seine Flügel sind ausgespannt. Der Engel der Geschichte muß so 
aussehen. Er hat das Antlitz der Vergangenheit zugewendet. Wo eine Kette 
von Begebenheiten vor uns erscheint, da sieht er eine einzige Katastrophe, 
die  unablässig  Trümmer  auf  Trümmer  häuft  und  sie  ihm  vor  die  Füße 
schleudert.  Er  möchte  wohl  verweilen,  die  Toten  wecken  und  das 
Zerschlagene zusammenfügen. Aber ein Sturm weht vom Paradiese her, der 
sich in seinen Flügeln verfangen hat und so stark ist, daß der Engel sie nicht 
mehr  schließen  kann.  Dieser  Sturm  treibt  ihn  unaufhaltsam  in  die  Zukunft, 
der er den Rücken kehrt, während der Trümmerhaufen vor ihm zum Himmel 
wächst. Das, was wir den Fortschritt nennen, ist dieser Sturm.

3

WHAT IS/WAS KRITISCHE THEORIE? 

• Critical Theory of society
• As opposed to traditional theory, or academics
• First developed in the Weimar Republic, after World War 
I, as a response to the failed November Revolution, in 
1920s and 1930s
• Reforging of Marx’s critique of society and political 
economy in a changed context
• Attempt to chart a critical path away from both 
traditional Marxism, yoked to established Communist 
parties, and academics

4

 
WHAT IS/WAS KRITISCHE THEORIE? (CONTD.)

• Attempt to critically redeﬁne the German Idealist 
tradition, e.g. a rereading of Hegel
• Emphasis on a critical totality, radical disregard of 
disciplinary boundaries
• Integration of insights from Freudian psychoanalysis in 
sociological/literary/cultural analyses
• Development of theoretically informed empirical research
• Political/aesthetic defense of avant-garde Modernist art/
literature/music.

5

6

THE 

CRITICAL 
THEORISTS

WHY IS IT IMPORTANT TO DISCUSS KRITISCHE 
THEORIE IN THE TRANSATLANTIC CONTEXT?
• Formative and productive emigration to the United States, not unlike the 
European Jewish emigration from 1930s to 1940s
• Marcuse and Löwenthal stayed back in the US
• Although Horkheimer and Adorno remigrated in the early 1950s, they still 
retained their American citizenships for a considerable while
• Wrote and published both in German and English during their exile in the 
US
• Their American experience forms the basis of the Kritische Theorie of the 
1940s and 1950s
• Critical Theory as we know it today would have been impossible without 
its exilic experience

7

WHAT IS THIS COURSE ABOUT...

• Therefore, this is a course in American Studies, with a 
focus on transnational/transatlantic American Studies

• Dealing with questions of thoughts, concepts and 
theories, and their multifarious travels

• Speciﬁcally, the transatlantic travel(s) of Kritische Theorie

• Beginning with Adorno’s Minima Moralia and “Kultur und 
Culture”...

8

