 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

Child Development, January/February 2000, Volume 71, Number 1, Pages 21—25

Does Memory Development Belong on an Endangered Topic List?

Deanna Kuhn

Although memory has long been regarded as a central and well-de(cid:222)ned topic within the (cid:222)eld of cognitive de-
velopment, developments in and related to the study of memory increasingly suggest that the study of mem-
ory needs to be situated in a number of broader conceptual and research contexts. Four of these contexts are
identi(cid:222)ed here and the ways they accommodate memory phenomena are examined: (1) knowledge (what is re-
membered?); (2) comprehension (what does it mean?); (3) context/function (why remember?); and (4) strategy
(how to remember?). 
, it is suggested, are best examined as knowledge structures that are the product
of efforts to understand and to know, and 
 is a socially situated activity undertaken in the service of
individual or social goals.

memorizing

Memories

INTRODUCTION
The question posed in the title of this article will strike
many as curious and even ill-conceived. Topics come
and go in our (cid:222)eld(cid:209)theory of mind, for example, at
the moment has assumed the center-stage role held
by conservation training a few decades ago. But the
topic of memory seems of a different sort altogether, a
topic with a long tradition inherited from experimen-
tal psychology and one demanding coverage in any
comprehensive  treatment  of  cognition  or  cognitive
development, more an enduring chapter title than a
passing  fancy.  Indeed,  as  Schneider  and  Bjorklund
(1998) begin their recent review, (cid:210)Memory develop-
ment has been one of the most-studied topics in all of
cognitive development(cid:211) (p. 467). What(cid:213)s more, mem-
ory has proven itself a topic of great applied relevance,
as attested to by the burst of studies on children(cid:213)s eye-
witness testimony and the accuracy of autobiograph-
ical memory.

What I wish to propose here is not that the impres-
sive volume of research devoted to memory develop-
ment  has  been  misguided  or  unproductive.  Rather,
my claim is that this millennial juncture in the history
of our (cid:222)eld coincides with a transition in the study of
memory. Developments in and related to the study
of memory make it necessary that the study of mem-
ory be situated in a number of broader contexts. Doing
so stands to ultimately enrich, not diminish, its im-
portance, even though it may compromise the clear
identity that memory now enjoys as a (cid:210)chapter title(cid:211)
topic. Speci(cid:222)cally, I argue for the need to identify the
study  of  memory  and  its  development  and  embed  it
within the context of the four topics depicted in Figure 1:
comprehension, knowledge, context, and strategy.

Although cast in the broader language of knowing
(rather than remembering), each of the four topics in
Figure 1 can be identi(cid:222)ed by a question it asks related

to memory: namely, what are we remembering, what
does it mean, why are we remembering, and how
will we do it? Each of these questions, I claim, in-
vokes a broader context in which the study of mem-
ory needs to be situated. After considering each of the
four, I conclude by addressing the implications of such
incorporation for memory development as a topic in
its own right.

As part of this situating of the study of memory, it
is necessary to distinguish two increasingly divergent
branches of memory research. One, connected to the
topics of comprehension and knowledge, can be re-
ferred to as the study of memories. These are the rep-
resentations that are formed, largely without inten-
tion or awareness, as the product of human efforts to
understand and to know. The other branch, which in-
vokes  the  topics  of  context  and  strategy,  can  be  re-
ferred to as the study of memorizing, a cognitive activ-
ity engaged in deliberately for a purpose and toward a
goal.  In  discussing  comprehension  and  knowledge,
therefore, we focus on memories, while memorizing
is the focus in the discussion of context and strategy.

COMPREHENSION: UNDERSTANDING AS 
THE TRANSPORT VEHICLE OF MEMORIES
If memory research has taught us anything, it is the in-
adequacy of a traditional model of memory develop-
ment  that  can  be  characterized  as  the  (cid:210)cupboard(cid:211)
model. Memory, according to this model, is the compan-
ion process to learning. Learning gets material into the
cupboard and memory stores it there until it is needed.
Memory development consists of cupboards getting
bigger and, possibly, more organized, as represented
by more (cid:222)nely differentiated storage compartments.

' 2000 by the Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/2000/7101-0003

 
 

 
 

 
 

22 Child Development

Figure 1

Is memory an endangered topic?

is

The cupboard model 

 useful in its representation
of the fact that memories may last a long time, much
longer than the typical memory experiment. Brainerd
and colleagues (Brainerd, Reyna, Howe, & Kingma,
1990)  have  taken  the  lead  in  moving  the  study  of
memory  beyond  its  characteristic  one-session  time
frame and toward the more relevant and appropriate
focus on the knowledge that people acquire and main-
tain  over  longer  periods  of  time.  In  every  other  re-
spect,  however,  the  cupboard  model  is  misleading.
Contrary to this model, what we remember is what
we  understand,  and  retrieval  involves  reconstruct-
ing  that  understanding.  We  (cid:210)know(cid:211)  that  the  story
character  who  we  are  told  swept  the  (cid:223)oor  used  a
broom, even if a broom is not mentioned in the story.
And whether or not it has been mentioned is some-
thing  we  are  not  reliable  in  remembering  (Paris  &
Lindauer, 1982).

What we remember is an integration of what we
currently experience, what we already know, and what
we infer. The key question, then, becomes this: How
do we come to understand and represent what we ex-
perience? In other words, how do we make meaning?
Viewed in the long-term perspective that Brainerd
et al. (1990) advocate, the question becomes a very
broad one. Developmentally it begins with the capac-
ity  to  form  mental  representations  (Mandler,  1998).
Research on scripts by Nelson (1986) and others sug-
gests that representations of events commonly take a
narrative form, and early in development there is little
differentiation  between  generalized  scripts  (e.g.,  the
birthday party) and speci(cid:222)c instantiations of them. It is

now clear that language (cid:222)gures centrally in the forma-
tion of these scripts (Nelson, 1996).

How experience is represented in the human mind
and how these representations themselves, as well as
representational capacity, become transformed are
questions at the core of our understanding of cognitive
development.  The  interpretation  of  new  input(cid:209)the
construction of meaning from new experience(cid:209)can
only be studied within the context of an existing base
of representations that de(cid:222)ne the individual(cid:213)s knowl-
edge at that time. Meaning will be constructed from
new experience only relative to the base of existing
meaning with which it will become integrated. More-
over, if we wish to study these newly constructed
meanings in their proper long-term context, we must
deal with the fact that they are not static. They will be-
come  transformed  as  new  experience  and  meaning
are integrated with them. My daughter(cid:213)s (cid:222)rst trip to
Disneyland, at age two, was no doubt remembered dif-
ferently than her second trip at age four. But her mem-
ories of the second trip forever transformed those of
the (cid:222)rst one.

Thus, to study memories is to study much of what
we are interested in under the headings of cognition
and cognitive development. The topic is not readily
simpli(cid:222)ed.

KNOWLEDGE: WHAT IS BEING REMEMBERED?
Chi(cid:213)s  landmark  studies  of  children(cid:213)s  and  adults(cid:213)
memories  of  chessboard  arrangements  had  the  im-
portant  consequence  of  making  clear  that  develop-

 
 

 
 

 
 

mental  changes  in  memory  capacity  were  not  to  be
identi(cid:222)ed in any absolute, domain-general terms (Chi
& Ceci, 1987). How 
 children or adults remember
depends on what they already know about what they
are remembering. Young chess experts routinely out-
perform older novices.

much

cussed  earlier,  such  remembering  is  constrained  by
understanding(cid:209)in other words, by the meaning at-
tributed to the knowledge constellations within that
domain.  Memory,  then,  becomes  a  function  of  both
knowledge and understanding.

Deanna Kuhn

23

Subsequent research undertaken within a knowl-
edge or domain-speci(cid:222)c-theory approach presents a
convincing case that knowledge is highly organized
within  speci(cid:222)c  content  domains.  Rather  than  being
entirely fragmentary, this domain-speci(cid:222)c knowledge
exhibits signi(cid:222)cant coherence and consistency to the
point of being (cid:210)theory-like(cid:211) in character, even when it
is incorrect and will in time be revised.

Progress  has  been  made  in  describing  evolving
knowledge structures within domains. Still, as Well-
man and Gelman (1998) note, we know comparatively
little about mechanisms of theory revision, i.e., about
the  way  new  information  is  encountered,  inter-
preted,  and  ultimately  integrated  with  existing
understandings.

What has become clear, however, whether we are
concerned with intentional memorizing efforts or the
often  unintentional  representations  of  knowledge
(memories)  that  make  up  knowledge  structures,  is
that  we  cannot  adequately  understand  memory  or
memory development except in the context of these
developing knowledge systems. It indeed matters
what it is that we are remembering. It would appear
then, that, within any domain, the (cid:222)rst order of busi-
ness is to understand and characterize the developing
knowledge system. Efforts to integrate new informa-
tion into this system and the mechanisms that effect
these integrative efforts(cid:209)in other words, the processes
involved  in  coming  to  know  and  remember(cid:209)can
then be examined.

In this framework, memories are knowledge and
memorizing  is  a  process  of  knowledge  revision.
Whether this knowledge is acquired unintentionally
or  whether  deliberate  memorization  or  knowledge
acquisition efforts contribute to the acquisition, it is
the form and structure and enabling mechanisms of
knowledge acquisition that become our primary con-
cern. We have an idea of the kinds of everyday expe-
rience  through  which  children  acquire  their  script-
like  knowledge  of  familiar  events  such  as  birthday
parties. Other kinds of knowledge may be less script-
like in character and take other forms. For example,
children may learn about the solar system or the rules
of chess. In any of these cases, we can best understand
the formation of memories as the evolution of speci(cid:222)c
knowledge structures within a domain. To what ex-
tent will children be able to retrieve and apply their
domain-speci(cid:222)c knowledge where it is useful? As dis-

CONTEXT: WHY REMEMBER?
Sociocultural  theorists  (Cole,  1996;  Rogoff,  1998)  de-
serve the lion(cid:213)s share of credit for the growing convic-
tion that we must extend cognitive research beyond
laboratories  and  into  the  real-life  contexts  in  which
children and adults are called on to think, learn, and
remember. The implications for the study of memory
and memory development are far-reaching.

People make intentional efforts to memorize, or to
retrieve what they may already know, because they
have a reason to do so. Remembering (cid:222)rst occurs as a
social activity the young child engages in with adults,
as  shared  experiences  are  recounted.  Eventually,  a
child is able to internalize this remembering activity,
which continues to take a narrative form, and under-
takes it in the absence of explicit social support. Later,
memorization is undertaken as an intentional activ-
ity, carried out for a purpose that bene(cid:222)ts the individ-
ual and/or the social group.

This contextualized, functional, or goal-based char-
acterization of remembering yields portrayals of the
activity that deviate signi(cid:222)cantly from those produced
by  traditional  laboratory  investigations.  Istomina(cid:213)s
(1975) study of young children(cid:213)s memory of a list of
grocery items in a contextualized versus a decontex-
tualized setting has become a classic in this respect;
though methodologically (cid:223)awed, its basic point has
now been replicated in numerous settings. Young Bra-
zilian candy sellers (Saxe, 1988) and adult racetrack en-
thusiasts  (Ceci  &  Liker,  1986)  remember  an  impres-
sive amount in the way of both procedures and factual
knowledge.  They  do  so,  we  can  presume,  because
they  have  reasons  to  remember  what  they  do.  It  is
worth their while to know and to remember, but rarely
as an end in itself. Rather, they remember in the service
of other goals inherent in the activities they pursue.

The implication seems clear: The study of memory
needs to be subordinated to and situated within the
context of the functional goal systems that character-
ize people(cid:213)s everyday activities. The mandate to do so
can be derived from the fact that the people we study
subordinate  their  own  remembering  efforts  to  their
purposes and goals. Why, then, should we examine
them otherwise? If we do so, for example by asking
people  to  remember  arbitrary  content  in  an  arti(cid:222)cial
setting, rather than bypassing context and purpose we
risk  substituting  an  arti(cid:222)cial,  momentary  goal  struc-

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

24 Child Development

ture (e.g., satisfying an experimenter) for a more mean-
ingful, enduring one.

Encouraging  work  by  Pressley  (1995)  and  others
indicates that (cid:222)ndings from some laboratory studies
of memory may be extendable to real-life settings, no-
tably the academic settings in which most intentional
memorizing is undertaken. A major practical (cid:222)nding
of Pressley(cid:213)s work is consonant with the critical role of
comprehension  highlighted  earlier:  Remembering  is
best when the individual attempts to construct mean-
ing from what is to be remembered. Hence the con-
clusions  reached  earlier  again  apply.  Memory  must
be examined within the contexts of knowledge and
understanding, as well as that of the individual(cid:213)s own
socially situated goals.

STRATEGIES: HOW TO REMEMBER
When memorization is undertaken to ful(cid:222)ll an indi-
vidual(cid:213)s own purposes and goals, strategies available
to the individual are likely to be employed, if it is un-
derstood that they will enhance effectiveness in reach-
ing the desired goal. How does this strategic skill and
understanding develop? Several decades of impor-
tant  research  on  children(cid:213)s  development  and  use  of
strategies for remembering is readily summarizable:
Young children very often fail to employ strategies for
remembering (mediation de(cid:222)ciencies). Effective strat-
egies, however, such as organization or rehearsal, can
be taught even to quite young children. The problem is
that children are unlikely to apply these strategies out-
side of the speci(cid:222)c context in which they were taught
(production de(cid:222)ciencies). And even when children
do use such strategies, they may not recognize their
value and may not bene(cid:222)t from using them (utiliza-
tion de(cid:222)ciencies).

Early studies of strategy development were devoted
almost entirely to memory strategies. More recently,
other kinds of cognitive strategies have been examined,
and a striking convergence of (cid:222)ndings has emerged,
despite the disparate domains and forms of cognition
examined. Microgenetic research shows that children
(as well as adults) have a repertory of multiple strate-
gies of varying adequacy that they apply variably even
when  the  problem  environment  remains  constant
(Kuhn, 1995; Siegler & Crowley, 1991).

The explanatory burden thus shifts from the perfor-
mance level to a metalevel that dictates which strate-
gies will be selected for use on a given occasion (Kuhn,
1999). This metalevel can be conceived of as compris-
ing  two  components,  the 
meta-
 (Kuhn & Pearsall, 1998). The role of the (cid:222)rst
strategic
is to represent task goals and the role of the second
is to coordinate those goals with the strategies known

  and  the 

metatask

to be available. The metalevel directs the application
of strategies, and feedback from this application is di-
rected back to the metalevel. This feedback leads to en-
hanced metalevel awareness of the goal and the ex-
tent to which it is being met by different strategies, as
well  as  enhanced  awareness  and  understanding  of
the strategies themselves, including their power and
limitations.  These  enhancements  at  the  metalevel
lead to revised strategy selection, and the revisions in
strategy usage in turn feed back to further enhance
understanding at the metalevel, thus forming a con-
tinuous cycle in which the metalevel both directs and
is  modi(cid:222)ed  by  the  performance  level  (see  Sophian,
1997, for a similar conception).

In this model the metalevel is privileged to be the
locus of developmental change. Developmentally, in-
creasing metalevel awareness and control may be the
most important dimension in terms of which we see
change (Kuhn, 1999). Such a model makes clear why ef-
forts  to  induce  change  directly  at  the  performance
level have only limited success, as indicated by failure
to transfer outside the immediate context. Strategy
training may appear successful, but if nothing has
been done to in(cid:223)uence the metalevel, the new behav-
ior will quickly disappear once the instructional con-
text is withdrawn and individuals resume metalevel
management of their own behavior.

Although early studies of relations between mem-
ory  and  metamemory  indicated  weak  associations,
more recent research has been encouraging in this re-
spect (see Schneider & Bjorklund, 1998, for review).
Research in the domain of scienti(cid:222)c inference strate-
gies (Kuhn & Pearsall, 1998) shows metastrategic and
metatask understanding intersecting in a gatekeeper
role  in  relation  to  performance.  Whatever  the  exact
dynamic relations turn out to be, the point is that there
is  likely  to  be  signi(cid:222)cant  similarity  between  these
strategy/metastrategy relations across different kinds
of  cognition.  With  respect  to  memory  strategies,  if
memory is as closely intertwined with cognition in a
broader sense, as suggested earlier, the development
of these strategies and mode of operation are likely to
resemble those of other kinds of cognitive strategies
(such as  problem-solving, reasoning,  and  inference).
Accordingly, it should be advantageous to situate the
study of memory strategies in the broader context of
how cognitive strategies in general develop and func-
tion, especially with respect to metalevel selection and
regulation.  Studies  of  different  kinds  of  cognitive
strategies stand to inform one another in this respect.

CONCLUSIONS
Despite sustained and vigorous research activity, some
long-standing, fundamental questions about memory

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Deanna Kuhn

25

development remain unanswered, the most notable
being  whether  memory  capacity  increases  with  de-
velopment. In recent years it has become clear that a
question of this sort is not going to be answered in the
absolute, decontextualized sense envisioned at one
time. The time has perhaps come, then, for a more
thorough  contextualization  of  the  study  of  memory
development, one outcome of which might be the re-
casting of old questions in new terms.

The what, why, and how questions in Figure 1 in-
voke  the  broader  contexts  in  which,  I  have  argued,
memory needs to be situated. Memory research has
contributed importantly to our understanding in each
of the four areas identi(cid:222)ed(cid:209)comprehension, knowl-
edge, context, and strategy. But the study of memory
and memory development in turn needs to pro(cid:222)t from
what has been learned in each of these areas and to be
enriched by integration with each of them.

Schneider and Bjorklund (1998) in their review as-
sert the (cid:210)impossibility of studying any type of mem-
ory processing in isolation from other aspects of the
developing cognitive system(cid:211) (p. 492). But they don(cid:213)t
pursue this claim to its seeming conclusion. It is this
(cid:210)developing cognitive system(cid:211) that we need to better
understand. Memory is not an isolated, or even an en-
tirely distinct, part of it. Deeper understanding of this
developing cognitive system can only enrich our un-
derstanding of memories as the knowledge represen-
tations that are the product of efforts to understand
and to know, and of memorizing as a socially situated
activity  undertaken  in  the  service  of  people(cid:213)s  own
goals. The next century(cid:213)s progress will be enhanced if
we connect the study of memories and memorizing to
the four even broader topics identi(cid:222)ed here and inter-
pret  the  results  within  the  frameworks  that  those
topics provide.

ADDRESS AND AFFILIATION
Corresponding  author: Deanna  Kuhn,  Box  119,
Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, NY
10027; e-mail: dk100@columbia.edu.

REFERENCES

Brainerd, C., Reyna, V., Howe, M., & Kingma, J. (1990). The
development  of  forgetting  and  reminiscence. 
Mono-
graphs  of  the  Society  for  Research  in  Child  Development,
55

(Serial No. 222).

Ceci, S., & Liker, J. (1986). A day at the races: A study of IQ,
Journal of Experimen-

cognitive complexity, and expertise. 
, 255—266.
tal Psychology: General, 115

Chi, M., & Ceci, S. (1987). Content knowledge: Its role, rep-
resentation, and restructuring in memory development.
In H. Reese (Ed.), 
Advances in child development and behav-
ior

 (Vol. 20). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.

Cole, M. (1996). 

Cultural psychology: A once and future disci-

pline.

 Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Istomina, Z. (1975). The development of voluntary memory

in preschool-age children. 

Soviet Psychology, 13

, 5—64.

Kuhn, D. (1995). Microgenetic study of change: What has it

told us? 

Psychological Science, 6

, 133—139.

Kuhn, D. (1999). Metacognitive development. In L. Balter &
Child psychology: A handbook of
 (pp. 259—286). Philadelphia: Psychol-

C. Tamis Le-Monda (Eds.), 
contemporary issues
ogy Press.

Kuhn, D., & Pearsall, S. (1998). Relations between metastra-
Cognitive

tegic  knowledge  and  strategic  performance. 
Development, 13

, 227—247.

Mandler, J. (1998). Representation. In D. Kuhn & R. Siegler
Handbook of child psychol-
 (5th ed., pp.

(Eds.), W. Damon (Series ed.), 
ogy: Vol. 2. Cognition, language, and perception
255—308). New York: Wiley.

Nelson, K. (1986). Event knowledge and cognitive develop-
Event knowledge: Structure and

ment. In K. Nelson (Ed.), 
function in development.

 Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Nelson,  K.  (1996). 

Language  in  cognitive  development:  The
  New  York:  Cambridge

emergence  of  the  mediated  mind.
University Press.

Paris, S., & Lindauer, B. (1982). The development of cogni-
Hand-
  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ:

tive skills during childhood. In B. Wolman (Ed.), 
book  of  developmental  psychology.
Prentice-Hall.

Pressley, M. (1995). What is intellectual development about in
the 1990s? Good information processing. In F. Weinert &
W. Schneider (Eds.), 
Memory performance and competencies:
Issues in growth and development.

 Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Rogoff, B. (1998). Cognition as a collaborative process. In D.
Kuhn & R. Siegler (Eds.), W. Damon (Series ed.), 
Hand-
book of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, language, and per-
ception

 (5th ed., pp. 679—744). New York: Wiley.

Saxe,  G.  (1988).  The  mathematics  of  street  vendors. 

Child

Development, 59

, 1415—1425.

Schneider, W., & Bjorklund, D. (1998). Memory. In D. Kuhn
& R. Siegler (Eds.), W. Damon (Series Ed.), 
Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, language, and perception
(5th ed., pp. 467—522). New York: Wiley.

Siegler, R., & Crowley, K. (1991). The microgenetic method:
A  direct  means  for  studying  cognitive  development.
American Psychologist, 46

(6), 606—620.

Sophian, C. (1997). Beyond competence: The signi(cid:222)cance of
Cognitive De-

performance for conceptual development. 
velopment, 12

, 281—303.

Wellman, H., & Gelman, S. (1998). Knowledge acquisition
in foundational domains. In D. Kuhn & R. Siegler (Eds.),
W. Damon (Series Ed.), 
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2.
 (5th ed., pp. 523—574).
Cognition, language, and perception
New York: Wiley.

This document is a scanned copy of a printed document.  No warranty is given about the accuracy of the copy.
Users should refer to the original published version of the material.

