This is a reformatted version of an article that appeared in Rev. Modern Physics 66, 1481-1507 (1994)

Biological Pattern Formation : from Basic Mechanisms to Complex

Structures

A. J. Koch1 and H. Meinhardt

http://www.eb.tuebingen.mpg.de/meinhardt; hans.meinhardt@tuebingen.mpg.de

Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology

Spemannstr. 35, D- 72076 T¨ubingen

The reliable development of highly complex organ-
isms is an intriguing and fascinating problem. The
genetic material is, as a rule, the same in each cell
of an organism. How do then cells, under the inﬂu-
ence of their common genes, produce spatial pat-
terns ? Simple models are discussed that describe
the generation of patterns out of an initially nearly
homogeneous state. They are based on nonlinear
interactions of at least two chemicals and on their
diffusion. The concepts of local autocatalysis and of
long range inhibition play a fundamental role. Nu-
merical simulations show that the models account
for many basic biological observations such as the
regeneration of a pattern after excision of tissue or
the production of regular (or nearly regular) arrays of
organs during production of regular (or nearly regu-
lar) arrays of organs during (or after) completion of
growth.
Very complex patterns can be generated in a repro-
ducible way by hierarchical coupling of several such
elementary reactions. Applications to animal coating
and to the generation of polygonally shaped patterns
are provided.
It is further shown how to generate a
strictly periodic pattern of units that themselves ex-
hibit a complex and polar ﬁne structure. This is il-
lustrated by two examples : the assembly of photore-
ceptor cells in the eye of Drosophila and the position-
ing of leaves and axillary buds in a growing shoot. In
both cases, the substructures have to achieve an in-
ternal polarity under the inﬂuence of some primary
pattern forming system existing in the ﬂy’s eye or in
the plant. The fact that similar models can describe
essential steps in so distantly related organisms as
animals and plants suggests that they reveal some
universal mechanisms.

1

1. INTRODUCTION

A most fascinating aspect of biological systems is the
generation of complex organisms in each round of the
life cycle. Higher organisms develop, as the rule, from a
single fertilized egg. The result is a highly reproducible
arrangement of differentiated cells. Many processes are
involved, for example cell differentiation, cell movement,
shape changes of cells and tissues, region-speciﬁc con-
trol of cell division and cell death. Development of an
organism is, of course, under genetic control but the ge-
netic information is usually the same in all cells. A crucial
problem is therefore the generation of spatial patterns
that allow a different fate of some cells in relation to oth-
ers.

The complexity of the evolving pattern seems to pre-
clude any mathematical theory. However, by experi-
mental
interference with a developing organism it has
turned out that the individual steps are fairly indepen-
dent of each other. For instance, the organization of the
anteroposterior axis (i.e., the head to tail pattern) in a
Drosophila embryo is controlled by a completely different
set of genes than the dorsoventral axis. Shortly after its
initiation, the development of a wing is largely indepen-
dent of the surrounding tissue and can progress even at
an ectopic position after transplantation. Therefore, mod-
els can be written for elementary steps in development.
The linkage of these steps requires then a second ap-
proximation.

The necessity of mathematical models for morpho-
genesis is evident. Pattern formation is certainly based
on the interaction of many components. Since the inter-
actions are expected to be nonlinear, our intuition is in-
sufﬁcient to check whether a particular assumption really
accounts for the experimental observation. By modelling,
the weak points of an hypothesis become evident and the
initial hypothesis can be modiﬁed or improved. Models
contain often simplifying assumptions and different mod-
els may account equally well for a particular observation.
This diversity should however be considered as an ad-
vantage : multiplicity of models stimulates the design of

experimental tests in order to discriminate between the
rival theories. In this way, theoretical considerations pro-
vide substantial help to the understanding of the mecha-
nisms on which development is based (Berking, 1981).

In his pioneering work, Turing (1952) has shown that
under certain conditions two interacting chemicals can
generate a stable inhomogeneous pattern if one of the
substances diffuses much faster than the other. This
result goes against “common sense” since diffusion is
expected to smooth out concentration differences rather
than to generate them.

However, Turing apologizes for the strange and un-
likely chemical reaction he used in his study. Meanwhile,
biochemically more feasible models have been devel-
oped and applied to different developmental situations
(Lefever, 1968 ; Gierer and Meinhardt, 1972 ; Gierer,
1977 ; Murray, 1990). Chemical systems have also
been intensively investigated for their ability to produce
“Turing patterns” : some experiments present beautiful
reaction-diffusion structures in open reactors (Ouyang et
al., 1989 ; Castets et al, 1990 ; de Kepper et al., 1991).

In the ﬁrst part of this article, after having shortly dis-
cussed the relevance of chemical gradients in biological
systems, we shall present simple models of pattern for-
mation and their common basis, local self-enhancement
and long range inhibition. The patterns that can be
generated are graded concentration proﬁles, local con-
centration maxima and stripe-like distributions of sub-
stances.
In the second part we shall show how more
complex patterns can be generated by hierarchical su-
perimposition of several pattern forming systems. The
formation of a regular periodic arrangement of different
cell types or the generation of polygonal patterns will be
discussed. The models of that section are original and
so far unpublished.

Appendix 7 contains a complete discussion of the lin-
ear stability analysis in the case of the simplest models.
The parameters used for the simulations presented here-
after are listed in Appendix 8. A reader interested in nu-
merical simulations should feel no difﬁculty to reproduce
or improve the results.

Throughout the paper, comparisons of models with
experimental observations are provided. If necessary the
biological background is outlined in such a way that the
article should be understandable without previous knowl-
edge of biology.

2. GRADIENTS IN BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
In many developmental systems small regions play an
important role because they are able to organize the fate
of the surrounding tissue. The mouth opening of a hy-
dra or the dorsal lip of an amphibian blastula are well
known examples. Transplantation of a small piece of
such an organizing centre into an ectopic position can
change the fate of the surrounding tissue : these cells are
then instructed to form those structures that are induced

2

in the normal neighborhood of such an organizing re-
gion. Based on these observations, Wolpert (1969) has
worked out the concept of positional information. The lo-
cal concentration of a substance that is distributed in a
graded fashion dictates the direction in which a group of
cells has to develop. The organizing region is thought
to be the source of such a morphogenetic substance. A
famous example is the determination of the digits in the
chick wing bud (Cooke and Summerbell, 1980 ; Tickle,
1981). It occurs under control of a small nest of cells lo-
cated at the posterior border of the wing bud, the zone
of polarizing activity (ZPA). The results nicely ﬁt with
the assumption of some hypothetical substance diffus-
ing out of the ZPA and producing a concentration gradi-
ent ; groups of cells form the correct digit by measuring
the local concentration within this gradient (Summerbell,
1974 ; Wolpert and Hornbruch, 1981). Many experiments
in which a second ZPA is implanted at various positions
of the wing bud conﬁrm this conjecture : supernumer-
ary digits are then formed at abnormal positions but in
accordance with the pattern predicted by the assumed
gradient produced by the two ZPA. A possible candidate
for the morphogenetic substance is retinoic acid (Thaller
and Eichele, 1987, 1988).
Indeed, small beets soaked
with this substance at low concentrations mimic all the
effects of a ZPA.

Nowadays there is a growing body of evidence that
chemical gradients play a key role in pattern formation
and cell differentiation. For instance, it has been ob-
served that the protein bicoid has a graded concentra-
tion distribution in the Drosophila melanogaster embryo ;
it organizes the anterior half of the ﬂy and has been fully
characterized (Driever and N¨usslein-Volhard, 1988 ; Bor-
ing et al., 1993).

In this context, theoretical models have to give satis-

factory answers to the following two questions.

• How can a system give rise and maintain large
scale inhomogeneities like gradients even when
starting from initially more or less homogeneous
conditions ?

• How do cells measure the local concentration in
order to interpret their position in a gradient and
choose the corresponding developmental path-
way ?

The next two sections are devoted to the ﬁrst question.
We shall discuss theoretical models having the ability
to produce graded distributions of chemical substances
and present their regulation characteristics.
In the sub-
sequent section, we shall show how to use the positional
information contained in gradients in order to induce a
correct differentiation.

3. SIMPLE MODELS FOR PATTERN

FORMATION

As mentioned, Turing (1952), was the ﬁrst who realized
that the interaction of two substances with different dif-
fusion rates can cause pattern formation. Gierer and
Meinhardt (1972) and independently Segel and Jackson
(1972) have shown that two features play a central role :
local self-enhancement and long range inhibition.
It is
essential to have an intuitive understanding of these two
requirements since they lay at the heart of pattern forma-
tion.

Self-enhancement is essential for small local inhomo-
geneities to be ampliﬁed. A substance a is said to be self-
enhancing or autocatalytic if a small increase of a over its
homogeneous steady-state concentration induces a fur-
ther increase of a.2 The self-enhancement doesn’t need
to be direct : a substance a may promote the production
rate of a substance b and vice versa ; or, as will be dis-
cussed further below, two chemicals that mutually inhibit
each other’s production act together like an autocatalytic
substance.

Self-enhancement alone is not sufﬁcient to generate
stable patterns. Once a begins to increase at a given po-
sition, its positive feedback would lead to an overall acti-
vation. Thus, the self-enhancement of a has to be com-
plemented by the action of a fast diffusing antagonist.
The latter one prevents the spread of the self-enhancing
reaction into the surrounding without choking the incip-
ient local increase. Two types of the antagonistic reac-
tions are conceivable. Either an inhibitory substance h
is produced by the activator that, in turn, slows down the
activator production. Or, a substrate s is consumed dur-
ing the autocatalysis. Its depletion slows down the self-
enhancing reaction.

3.1. Activator-inhibitor systems
The following set of differential equations describes a
possible interaction between an activator a and its rapidly
diffusing antagonist h (Gierer and Meinhardt, 1972).

a2

(1a)

− µaa + σa

= Da (cid:52)a + ρa
(1 + κaa2)h
= Dh (cid:52)h + ρha2 − µhh + σh

∂a
∂t
∂h
(1b)
∂t
where (cid:52) is the Laplace operator ; in a two dimensional
orthonormal coordinate system, it writes (cid:52) = ∂2/∂x2 +
∂2/∂y2. Da, Dh are the diffusion constants, µa, µh the re-
moval rates and ρa, ρh the cross-reactions coefﬁcients ;
σa, σh are basic production terms ; κa is a saturation con-
stant.

As discussed above, lateral inhibition of a by h re-
quires that the antagonist h diffuses faster than the self-

2To simplify the notations, we shall use the same symbol to design a chem-

ical species and its concentration. This should not lead to any confusion.

Figure 1: Patterns produced by the activator-inhibitor model
(1). (a) Initial, intermediate and ﬁnal activator (top) and in-
hibitor (bottom) distribution. (b) Result of a similar simulation
in a larger ﬁeld. The concentration of the activator is suggested
by the dot density. (c) Saturation of autocatalysis (κa > 0) can
lead to a stripe-like arrangement of activated cells.

enhanced substance a : Dh (cid:29) Da.3 This is not yet sufﬁ-
cient to generate stable patterns. We show in Appendix 7
that in addition the inhibitor has to adapt rapidly to any
change of the activator. This is the case if the removal
rate of h is large compared to the one of a : µh > µa.
Otherwise the system oscillates or produces travelling
waves.

Though not necessary for the capability of pattern for-
mation, the saturation constant κa has a deep impact on
the ﬁnal aspect of the pattern. Without saturation, some-
what irregularly arranged peaks are formed whereby a
maximum and minimum distance between the maxima is
maintained (ﬁgure 1a,b). In contrast, if the autocatalysis
saturates (κa > 0), the inhibitor production is also limited.
A stripe-like pattern emerges : in this arrangement acti-
vated cells have activated neighbors ; nevertheless non-
activated areas are close by into which the inhibitor can
diffuse (ﬁgure 1c).

Embryonic development makes often use of stripe
formation. For example, genes essential for the segmen-

3Here are some orders of magnitude for the diffusion constants in cells.
Roughly speaking, the diffusion constants in cytoplasm range from 10−6
cm2s−1 for small molecules to 10−8 cm2s−1 for proteins. Diffusion from
cell to cell via gap junctions lowers these values by a factor 10 (Crick, 1970 ;
Slack, 1987).

3

tation of insects are activated in narrow stripes that sur-
round the embryo in a belt like manner (Ingham, 1991).
In monkeys,
the nerves of the right and the left eye
project onto adjacent stripes in the cortex (Hubel et al.,
1977). The stripes of a zebra are proverbial.

By convenient choice of the concentration units for a
and h, it is always possible to set µa = ρa and µh =
ρh (Appendix 7). Moreover, some constants involved in
(1) are not essential for the morphogenetic ability of this
system (they are useful if one needs “ﬁne tuning” of the
regulation properties). In its simplest form, the activator-
inhibitor model writes:
= Da (cid:52)a + ρa
= Dh (cid:52)h + ρh

∂a
∂t
∂h
∂t
Convenient length and time units can be found in which
ρa = Dh = 1. This reduces the number of essential
parameters to two, namely Da and ρh.

(cid:18) a2
(cid:19)
(cid:0) a2 − h(cid:1) .

− a

(2b)

(2a)

h

3.2. Activator-substrate systems
Lateral inhibition can also be achieved by the depletion
of a substance s required for the autocatalysis :

a2s

a2s

(3a)

(3b)

= Da (cid:52)a + ρa
= Ds (cid:52)s − ρs

1 + κaa2 − µaa + σa
1 + κaa2 + σs .

∂a
∂t
∂s
∂t
The parameters Da, Ds, µa, ρa, ρs, κa, σa and σs have
the same meaning as in Eq. (1) ; a is the self-enhanced
reactant, while s plays the role of the antagonist : it can
be interpreted as a substrate depleted by a. For this
reason, we shall refer to this system as the activator-
substrate model. Lateral inhibition of a by s is effective if
Ds (cid:29) Da. The model has similarities with the well-known
Brusselator (Lefever, 1968 ; Auchmuty and Nicolis, 1975 ;
Vardasca et al., 1992).

Suitable concentration units for a and s allow to set
In its simplest form, the system

= Da (cid:52)a + ρa
= Ds (cid:52)s + ρs

(cid:0) a2s − a(cid:1)
(cid:0) 1 − a2s(cid:1) .

µa = ρa and σs = ρs.
looks like
∂a
∂t
∂s
∂t
One can always adapt the time and length units so that
ρa = Ds = 1 ; only two parameters, ρs and Da, are then
remaining.

(4b)

(4a)

Figure 2 presents typical patterns resulting from such
a model. The activator-substrate and activator-inhibitor
models have some distinctly different properties. As can
be seen in ﬁgure 2, in (a, s) systems the activator forms
rounded mounds rather than sharp peaks as it is the case
for (a, h) models (ﬁgure 1a).
In a growing ﬁeld of cells,
an (a, s) system produces new maxima preferentially by

Figure 2: Patterns produced by the activator-substrate model
(3). (a) Initial, intermediate and ﬁnal pattern. Upper and lower
plots show the concentration of a and s respectively. A high
level of a produces a pit in the distribution of the substrate s.
(b) Similar simulation in a larger ﬁeld (the activator concen-
tration is shown). Fig. 1 and 2 have been calculated with cor-
responding parameters. Note that nevertheless the peaks are
here broader and more densely packed. (c) Saturation of the
autocatalysis (κa > 0) leads to the formation of stripes.

a split and shift of existing ones, while in (a, h) models
new peaks are inserted at the maximum distance from
the existing ones. The reason for the shift of maxima in
an (a, s) system is the following. With growth, the sub-
strate concentration increases in the enlarging space be-
tween the activated regions. This can lead to a higher ac-
tivator production at the side of a maximum if compared
with its centre.
In such a case the maximum begins to
wander towards higher substrate concentrations until a
new optimum is reached. In (a, h) systems, a maximum
suppresses more efﬁciently the formation of other max-
ima in the surroundings. This is evident from Fig. 1 and
2. In the former case the distance between the maxima
is much higher although corresponding parameters have
been used for both simulations (see Appendix 8). We
shall often make use of these different properties.
If a
maximum has to be displaced or to form a wave, one
will preferentially use an (a, s) system. In contrast, if an
isolated maximum has to be generated, we shall employ
an (a, h) system. The ultimate reason of this different
behavior is related to the inherent saturation in the (a, s)
system. The autocatalysis comes necessarily to rest if all

4

Somewhat more complex interactions allow the
space-dependent activation of several genes under the
inﬂuence of a single gradient (Meinhardt, 1978). Mean-
while many genes have been found with a direct regu-
latory inﬂuence on their own activity (see, for instance,
Kuziora and McGinnis, 1990 ; a review is given by Ser-
ﬂing, 1989), supporting the view that autoregulation is an
essential element to generate stable cell states in devel-
opment.

(cid:18)
(cid:18)

c

1

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

3.4. Other realizations of local autocatalysis and long
ranging inhibition
In the above mentioned models, self-enhancement oc-
curs by direct autocatalysis (the activator production term
in ∂a/∂t is proportional to a2). This direct feedback is
not necessary. As already mentioned, self-enhancement
may also result from indirect mechanisms. As an exam-
ple, consider the following system :

(6c)

(6a)

(6b)

+ σb

+ σa

= Da(cid:52)a + ρa

1 + κab2 − a
− b

= Db(cid:52)b + ρb
1 + κba2c
= Dc(cid:52)c + ρc ( b − ac ) .

∂a
∂t
∂b
∂t
∂c
∂t
In this example the two substances a and b mutually
repress each other’s production. A small local advan-
tage of a leads to a decrease of the b production.
If
b shrinks, a increases further, and so on.
In this case,
self-enhancement results from the local repression of a
repression. The necessary long ranging inhibition is me-
diated by the rapidly diffusing substance c. The latter is
produced by b but is poisonous for it. Further, c is re-
moved with help of a. So, although a and b are locally
competing, a needs b in its vicinity and vice versa. There-
fore, the preferred pattern generated by such a system
consists of stripes of a and b, closely aligned with each
other.

The interaction given above is a simple example for
an important class of pattern forming reactions based on
long range activation of cell states that locally exclude
each other (Meinhardt and Gierer, 1980). According to
the theory, they play an essential role in the segmen-
tation of insects (Meinhardt, 1986). Molecular analysis
has conﬁrmed this scheme ; the engrailed and the wing-
less genes of Drosophila have the predicted properties
[see, for instance, Ingham and Nakano (1990) or Ingham
(1991) ].

The examples discussed here have been picked out
of a large set of feasible morphogenetic models (Gierer,
1981). They have the advantage of conceptual simplic-
ity. Many other nonlinear systems have been proposed
(Lacalli, 1990 ; Lyons and Harrison, 1992 ; for a broad
overview, see Murray, 1990). But, to state it once again,
more important than the details of the equations are the

Figure 3: Position-dependent activation of a gene by an exter-
nal signal simulated in a one-dimensional array of cells accord-
ing to equation (5). The concentration of the autoregulatory
gene product y (thin lines) is given as a function of position
and time. A primary gradient (boldface line) is used as exter-
nal signal σext. Despite of the shallow signal, a sharp threshold
exists ; if exceeded, the system switches irreversibly to the high
state.

the substrate is used up. An (a, h) system obtains similar
properties if the autocatalysis saturates moderately.

3.3. Biochemical switches
A monotonic gradient based on mechanisms as de-
scribed above can be maintained only if the size of the
tissue is small since otherwise the time required to ex-
change molecules by diffusion from one side of the ﬁeld
to the other would become too long. Indeed, as Wolpert
(1969) has pointed out, all biological systems in which
pattern formation takes place are small, less than 1 mm
and less than 100 cells in diameter. In an organism grow-
ing beyond this size, cells have to make use of the signals
they have obtained by activating particular genes. Once
triggered, the gene activation should be independent of
the evoking signal. Similarly to pattern formation, this
requires either a direct or an indirect autocatalytic activa-
tion of genes (Meinhardt, 1978).

Here is a simple example of a switch system.

y2

(5)

= ρy

1 + κyy2 − µyy + σext .

∂y
∂t
In this equation ρy, µy and κy are constants ; σext de-
scribes the external signal.
In the absence of such a
signal the system has two stable steady states, the low
α)/2κyµy,
one at y = 0 and the high one at y = (ρy +
separated by an unstable steady state at y = (ρy −
√
α)/2κyµy, where α = ρ2
If the external sig-
nal σext exceeds a certain threshold the system switches
from the low to the high state (Figure 3). Once the un-
stable steady state is surpassed, the high state will be
reached and maintained independently of the external
signal (which could even vanish).

y − 4κyµ2
y.

√

5

4. SOME REGULATORY PROPERTIES OF

PATTERN FORMING REACTIONS

In the previous section, we discussed some simple mod-
els able to produce inhomogeneous concentrations of
chemicals out of a (nearly) homogeneous initial state. Let
us now observe the main characteristics of the resulting
patterns.

4.1. Insertion of new maxima during isotropic growth
Suppose that the initial ﬁeld is large enough. If the pat-
tern is initiated by small random ﬂuctuations, the inho-
mogeneous steady state of an activator-inhibitor model
consists of irregularly arranged activator peaks. Due to
lateral inhibition, each peak maintains a certain minimal
distance with its neighbors.4

If the ﬁeld grows isotropically (Fig. 4), new activator
maxima emerge at positions where the inhibitor is too low
to further repress the local onset of autocatalysis from
the basic activator production. This requires a minimum
distance from existing activated centres. Therefore, the
average spacing and the overall density of maxima re-
main approximately constant.

Biological examples of such near-periodic patterns
are the distribution of stomata (special organs for gas
exchange) on the lower surface of leaves (B¨unning and
Sagromsky, 1948) or the arrangement of bristles on in-
sect cuticle (Wigglesworth, 1940). In both cases, it has
been demonstrated that during growth new structures
arise where the old ones are the most widely spaced
(Fig. 4b).

4.2. Strictly periodic patterns
To get strictly periodic patterns, one needs more sub-
tle mechanisms. The simplest idea would be to achieve
strict periodicity by relaxation of a random structure.
However, this is unrealistic from a biological point of view.
Relaxation needs time. A misplaced maximum may al-
ready evoke a particular structure, for instance a bristle,
at the wrong position. This cannot be corrected by a later
shift of the maximum to the correct place.

Strictly regular structures are formed during marginal
growth. With the addition of new cells at the bound-
aries, the distance between these cells and the exist-
ing maxima increases and the inhibitor concentration de-
creases. Whenever the inhibitor concentration becomes
lower than a threshold a new maximum is triggered.
Therefore, each new maximum keeps a well deﬁned dis-
tance from the previous formed ones and the arrange-
ment is very regular (ﬁgure 5).

A famous example for the generation of a strictly pe-
riodic structure is the initiation of leaves on a growing
shoot. As the shoot grows upward, new leaves (or ﬂorets,

4The mean distance d between two neighboring maxima can be evaluated
by use of the wave number kmax calculated in the linear approximation [see
Appendix 7, equation (??)] : d ≈ 1/kmax.

6

Figure 4: Insertion of new maxima during growth. (a) During
isotropic growth, the distance between the maxima enlarges
and the inhibitor concentration drops in between. Whenever
the inhibition becomes too weak, a new maximum is triggered.
This can only occur if a minimum distance from existing max-
ima is respected. The ﬁgure is calculated with an (a, h) model
and shows the activator concentration.
(b) Example for the
insertion of new structures during growth : the distribution of
bristles on the cuticle of a bug Rhodnius prolixus (after Wig-
glesworth, 1940) The drawings correspond to the fourth (left)
and ﬁfth (right) larval instars respectively. Bristle positions are
marked with circles (◦) ; during growth, new bristles (•) appear
where the old ones are the most spaced.

basic principles on which all these models rely, on local
self-enhancement and long ranging inhibition.

Numerical simulations have shown that properties of
the systems discussed above are able to account for
many observations. As an example, the regeneration af-
ter tissue removal will be discussed further below.

The models presented describe biochemical reac-
tions and diffusion of the reactants. Other kind of inter-
actions are possible, mediated for instance by mechan-
ical forces (Lewis and Murray, 1992 ; Bentil and Murray,
1993), by electric potentials (Jaffe, 1981 ; Stern, 1986)
or by surface contact between cell membranes (Babloy-
antz, 1977). Cellular automata are also often used to
explain emergence of inhomogeneous patterns (Cocho
et al., 1987) ; they provide particularly elegant solutions
as long as only cell-cell contacts are involved (i.e., the
state of a cell affects only its direct neighbors). How-
ever, chemical interactions coupled by the exchange of
molecules (either by diffusion or by more complex signal-
ing mechanisms) are believed to be the main motor of
primary pattern genesis in biological systems.

=>Figure 6: Regeneration with polarity reversal. (a) Experimen-
tal observation : the early blastula of a sea urchin is cut in two
halves. Cells close to the wound are vitally stained (dotted
region) to determine later the original orientation. Both parts
regenerate a complete embryo. They are mirror-symmetric,
so that in one fragment the polarity must have been reverted
(H¨orstadius and Wolsky, 1936). (b) Simulation by an activator-
inhibitor model. The abscissa scale gives the position along the
dorso-ventral axis of the blastula, in % of the animal length.
After separation, the high residual inhibitor concentration (- - -
) in the non-activated part (arrow) leads to regeneration of the
activator (—) at the opposite end of the ﬁeld. The distribution
before and after cutting is shown, as well as the newly formed
steady state.

mid line and spreads to both sides of the back. Exper-
iments (Davidson, 1983a, 1983b) have clearly demon-
strated that lateral inhibition is involved in the formation
of the regularly spaced feather primordia. We shall meet
a similar phenomenon in section 5 when discussing the
formation of the Drosophila eye.

4.3. Regeneration properties and polarity
Many biological systems can regenerate missing parts.
The models discussed above are able to account for this
property. We shall use the activator-inhibitor model and
modiﬁcations of it to demonstrate this feature and com-
pare them with biological observations.

After partition of an early sea urchin embryo both
fragment regenerate complete embryos. By vital stain-
ing during separation it has been shown that both em-
bryos obtain a mirror-image orientation with respect to
each other (Fig. 6). According to the model, in the non-
activated fragment the remnant inhibitor decays until a
new activation is triggered. The polarity of the resulting
pattern depends on the distribution of the residual acti-
vator and inhibitor in the fragment. A polarity reversal,
as in the case of the sea urchin mentioned above, will
take place if the residual inhibitor gradient is decisive for
its orientation.
It is the region with the lowest inhibitor

Figure 5: Generation of periodic structures during marginal
growth. (a) In this simulation, the domain enlarges by addition
of new cells at the upper and left border ; a periodic structure
emerges. Plotted is the activator of an (a, h) model. (b) The
regular spacing of thorns on this cactus is achieved by apical
growth (see also section 5). The thorns are arranged along
helices that wrap around the stem. (c) Feather primordia are
regularly spaced on the back of the chicken. To position them
accurately, the chicken “simulates” growth by use of a deter-
mination wave that starts from the dorsal mid line and spreads
on both sides : only cells reached by the wave can initiate the
development of primordia. The wave motion simulates growth
by enlarging the region competent for feather production (pho-
tograph by courtesy of Dr. H. Ichijo).

scales, etc.) are added sequentially near the tip, so as to
maximize the spacing with the elder ones (Adler, 1975 ;
Marzec and Kappraff, 1983). Leaves emerge along spi-
rals (Fig. 5b) that wrap around the stem (Coxeter, 1961 ;
Rothen and Koch, 1989a, 1989b). We shall come back
to this particular pattern in section 5.

It may also happen that systems which have already
reached a large size need to position organs in a regu-
lar fashion. This can occur by a “simulated” growth. The
property of a tissue may change in a wavelike manner
from a state noncompetent to a state competent for pat-
tern formation. Although many cells are already present,
pattern formation can take place only in a small portion
of the ﬁeld. With the enlargement of the competent re-
gion more and more maxima are formed that keep pre-
cise distances to the existing ones. An example is the
formation of the regularly spaced feather pattern in chick
(Fig. 5c). Feather primordia begin their differentiation
behind a competence wave that starts from the dorsal

7

>?=few hours, a major change of the source density requires
approximately two days (Wilby and Webster, 1970).

In the following model, a feedback exist from the in-
hibitor h onto the source density b. Therefore, in the
course of time, a long ranging gradient not only of h
but also of b will be established. Whenever the system
is forced to regenerate, the residual distribution of b en-
sures the maintenance of polarity.

(cid:19)

(cid:21)

(cid:18) a2
(cid:20)
(cid:0) a2 − h(cid:1)

b

(7c)

(7a)

(7b)

− a

h2 + σa

= Da (cid:52)a + ρa
= Dh (cid:52)h + ρh
= ρb ( h − b ) .

∂a
∂t
∂h
∂t
∂b
∂t
As can be veriﬁed in (7c), at equilibrium, b = h. Thus, the
self-enhancement term ba2/h2 in the activator equation
(7a) reduces to a2/h as in the usual activator-inhibitor
model (1). Since the removal rate ρb is small compared
to ρa and ρh, b preserves the polarity when the animal
is dissected : due to enhancement of autocatalysis by b,
the activator a builds up again in each half at the site
of highest b concentration. The position of the relative
highest source density plays the crucial role as to where
the new activator maximum will be formed. This insures
maintenance of the initial polarity (Fig. 7).

The feedback of h onto the source density b has an-
other very important effect, it helps to suppress the initi-
ation of secondary maxima. This is required if a single
structure, for instance a single head, should be main-
tained in a system despite of substantial growth. Since,
with increasing distance from the existing maxima, cells
have a lower and lower source density, it becomes less
likely that these cells overcome the inhibition spreading
from an existing maximum.

In Hydra, treatment with diacylglycerol (a substance
involved in the second messenger pathway) causes su-
pernumerary heads (M¨uller, 1990). From detailed obser-
vations and simulations one can conclude that this sub-
stance is able to increase the source density in a dra-
matic way. Since the source density becomes high ev-
erywhere, the so-called apical dominance of an existing
head is lost and supernumerary heads can be formed.
These heads keep distance from each other since the
spacing mechanism enforced by the inhibitor alone is still
working. The model agrees with many other experimen-
tal results, including the existence of a critical size (see
Appendix 7) below which the animal is unable to regen-
erate (Shimizu et al., 1993).

5. FROM SIMPLE GRADIENTS TO

COMPLEX STRUCTURES

So far we have considered models able to generate inho-
mogeneous distributions of substances out of an initially
uniform state. By combining several systems of this kind
very complex structures can be formed in a reproducible

8

Figure 7: Regeneration with maintained polarity. (a) After cut-
ting, fragments of Hydra regenerate. The original apical-basal
polarity is maintained. (b) Model based on Eq. (7). The ab-
scissa gives, in % of the full length, the position along the body
axis. The inhibitor is assumed to have a feedback on the source
density b (- - -) which describes the general ability of the cells
to perform the autocatalysis. This source density, having a long
time constant, does not change considerably during regenera-
tion of the activator-inhibitor pattern. Regions closer to the
original head have an advantage in the competition for head
formation and the new maximum of the activator a (—) is reli-
ably triggered in the region which was originally closest to the
apical side.

concentration, i.e., the region most distant to the origi-
nally activated site that wins the competition to become
activated.

In many other systems the polarity is maintained.
The fresh water polyp Hydra (Wilby and Webster, 1970 ;
Wolpert et al., 1971 ; Macauley-Bode and Bode, 1984)
and planarians (Flickinger and Coward, 1962 ; Goss,
1974 ; Chandebois, 1976) are examples. The mainte-
nance of polarity implies that the same tissue can regen-
erate either a head or a foot depending whether this par-
ticular tissue is located at the apical or the basal end of
the fragment which has to regenerate. Morgan (1904)
interpreted this phenomena in that a graded stable tis-
sue property exists.
It provides a graded advantage in
the race to regenerate a removed structure. During head
regeneration, for instance, those cells will win that were
originally closest to the removed head.

In terms of the activator-inhibitor mechanism, a sys-
tematic difference in the ability to perform the autocatal-
ysis must exist. We call this property the source density.
Detailed simulations for hydra (Meinhardt, 1993) have
shown that the source density must have approximately
the same slope as the inhibitor. However, while time con-
stants of the activator and inhibitor are in the range of a

way. Central is the idea of hierarchy. A ﬁrst system A es-
tablishes a primary pattern that is used to modify and trig-
ger a second system B. The feedback in the reverse di-
rection, of B onto A, is assumed to be weak (this greatly
simpliﬁes the treatment of these nonlinear systems and
makes the comprehension of their properties easier).

To ﬁx the ideas, suppose that both A and B are
activator-inhibitor systems (aA, hA) and (aB, hB).
It
is then natural to assume that parameters ρaB, ρhB,
σaB . . . of B are functions of the chemical concentrations
of A. The couplings which proved to be the simplest and
the most efﬁcient in simulations consist to modify either
the cross-reaction parameter ρaB or the basic (activator-
independent) production σaB of the second activator aB.
The two following thumb rules are helpful.

• If the second system has to respond dynamically
to any change of the ﬁrst one, one will preferen-
tially alter the value of ρaB. This ensures that any
change in A is repercuted on B [in terms of the
ﬁgure ?? in Appendix 7, one would choose the cou-
pling function ρaB in such a way that the system
B shifts under the pressure of A from the region
H of the stability diagram (where B has no pattern
formation ability) into the domain I (where inhomo-
geneities can be ampliﬁed) ].

• If A has just to trigger B, the coupling between the
two systems is achieved by the basic production
σaB. The structure developed by B is then stable
even if, later, A vanishes.

Other kinds of interactions are conceivable as well. For
instance, cells could change the communication with
their neighbors by opening or closing gap junctions ; this
can be modeled by altering the diffusion constants un-
der the inﬂuence of a second patterning system. In the
four examples developed below we restrict, however, the
interaction between systems to the two rules mentioned
above. The two ﬁrst systems are relatively simple models
of animal coat patterns and of reticulated structures. The
last two examples are more complex and describe inter-
action that leads to the precise arrangement of differently
determined cells in a strictly periodic way. The eye forma-
tion in Drosophila and organ genesis in a growing plant
will be used as biological counterparts.

5.1. Animal coat patterns
The variability and complexity of animal coat patterns has
attracted many biologists. Models can be found for the
coloration of butterﬂy wings (Nijhout, 1978, 1980 ; Mur-
ray, 1981), zebra stripes (Bard, 1981 ; Murray, 1981), pat-
terns on snake skin (Cocho et al., 1987 ; Murray and My-
erscough, 1991) or on sea shells (Meinhardt and Klinger,
1987 ; Ermentrout et al., 1989). We present hereafter
a simple reaction-diffusion mechanism which allows a
large variability of patterns, ranging from the spots of the
cheetah to the reticulated coat of giraffes.

Figure 8: Analogy of the giraffe pattern with Dirichlet do-
(a) Side of a giraffe (Giraffa camelopardalis reticu-
mains.
lata). The pattern is formed by convex polygons separated
by thin lines (photograph kindly provided by O. Berger). The
formal resemblance with Dirichlet domains is suggestive. (b)
Construction and deﬁnition of Dirichlet domains. Given a set
{P1, . . . , Pn} of points belonging to a surface S, one draws
the perpendicular bisectors between neighboring points. The
convex envelop surrounding a center Pi delimits its associ-
ated Dirichlet domain Di. By construction, Di contains all
the points of the surface S nearer to Pi than to any other Pj
(j (cid:54)= i).

In mammals, hair pigmentation is due to melanocytes
which are supposed to be uniformly distributed in the
derma. Whether they produce melanin (which colors
hairs) or not is believed to depend on the presence of
some unknown chemicals whose pattern is laid down
during the early embryogenesis (Bard, 1977).

Let us start with a short description of the giraffe
coat. Figure 8 show the similarity between the polygo-
nal shaped spots that cover the animal and Dirichlet do-
mains. This suggests that a reaction-diffusion system is
at work in the giraffe’s coat that is able to produce Dirich-
let polygons. Consider a surface S and points P1, . . ., Pn
randomly scattered on it. Suppose that each Pi initiates
at a given time a chemical wave which spreads uniformly
to all directions. The system should be so that, if two
waves encounter, they annihilate each other. The lines
along which annihilation occurs deﬁnes the envelops of
the Dirichlet domains around the initial centers Pi. The
following reaction-diffusion system fulﬁls these require-
ments :

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

∂a
∂t
∂s
∂t
∂y
∂t

= Da(cid:52)a + ρa

= Ds(cid:52)s +
y2

= ρy

a2s

1 + κaa2 − a
− ρsa2s
1 + κaa2 − µss
1 + κyy2 − µyy + σya

1 + κsy

σs

(8a)

(8b)

(8c)

One recognizes a modiﬁed activator-substrate model
(a, s) combined with a switching system y. Melanocytes
activity is given by y : y = 1 corresponds to cells produc-
ing melanin, while melanocytes with y = 0 don’t. The

9

=>state y of each pigment cell is determined by its exposi-
tion to the morphogen a. To insure that a doesn’t produce
a stationary pattern but spreads like a wave, the diffusion
constant of s should not be too large when compared to
the one of a.

The system works in the following way : initially y = 0,
a = 0 and s = so everywhere, except on some randomly
scattered points5 Pi where a = ao ; this high value of
a switches y from 0 to 1 at Pi due to the source term
σya in (8c). On the other hand, due to the depletion of s
and to its low diffusion constant Ds, high a regions shift
toward zones where the substrate is abundant : a-waves
propagate over the surface. When two such waves get
close, they annihilate each other due to the depletion of
substrate s. Owing to its switching nature, y needs the
activator a just for being triggered. Once a has vanished,
the state of y remains stable. Note that y has a negative
feedback on the production of s in (8b) : in regions where
y has switched on, it is no longer necessary to waste
energy to produce the substrate s any more.

Figure 9a presents the result of a simulation. The
similarity with the coat of a giraffe is obvious. Straight
lines with nearly constant thickness delineate irregular
polygons ; earlier models proposed for giraffe patterns
(Murray, 1981, 1988) produce rather spots comparable
to Fig. 9c.

According to the parameter values, the model (8) pro-
duces a variety of patterns related to Dirichlet domains.
if the removal rate of s is low enough,
For instance,
regions where a doesn’t vanish subsist ;
the system
reaches then a stable conﬁguration where the activator
a remains activated along circular rings or “half-moons”
centered on the initiating points Pi (Fig. 9b). Conversely,
if the consumption of s is too high, the a-waves cannot
spread very far and die before they meet : randomly scat-
tered spots are formed (Fig. 9c).
In that situation, the
resulting pattern has much similarities with the one de-
scribed by Murray (1981, 1988).

The coats of mammals have been taken as illustra-
tions. Fishes, snakes and insects show similar patterns.
It is appealing to imagine that they may all be based on a
common mechanism involving Dirichlet domains, as dis-
cussed above.

5.2. Reticulated structures
Polygonal patterns are also common in other biological
systems. The ﬁne veins of the wing of a dragonﬂy or the
projection areas of mice sensory whiskers on the brain
are examples (Fig. 10).

A crucial property of the system discussed in the pre-
ceding paragraph is that the pattern, once formed, is
ﬁxed. For instance, no new lines can be inserted dur-

5In principle the centers Pi could be laid down by a primary pattern for-
mation mechanism (aP , hP ) like the one used to produce ﬁgure 1a . These
points would then activate the production of a by means of an additional term
σaaP in Eq. (8a). We skip this step.

10

Figure 9: Simulation with the system (8). The dot density is
proportional to the concentration of y. According to the pa-
rameter set, the resulting pattern will have similarities with the
one observed on the coat of giraffes (Giraffa camelopardalis
reticulata) (a), of leopards (Panthera pardus) (b) or of chee-
tahs (Acinonyx jubatus) (c).

ing growth to subdivide a large polygon into two smaller
ones. This is appropriate for the giraffe coating as in-
dicated by the large size of the polygons. For other sys-
tems such as the wing of the dragonﬂy mentioned above,
it is to be expected that the ﬁnal pattern is not produced in
a single step at a particular moment of the development ;
it is rather likely that, at an early stage and in a small
ﬁeld, a simple pattern is laid down.
In analogy to the
Drosophila wing venation (Diaz-Benjumea et al., 1989 ;
Garcia-Bellido et al., 1992), we assume that the posi-
tions of the main veins of the dragonﬂy wing are genet-
ically determined ; the ﬁner ones are presumably added
later in order to strengthen the growing structure and so
as to keep approximately constant the size of a domain
enclosed by veins.

The following model has this property. It relies upon
hierarchical
interactions of two systems. A ﬁrst (a, s)
activator-substrate system produces a pattern of activa-

tor mounds (see Fig. 2a) :

∂a
∂t
∂s
∂t

= Da (cid:52)a + ρa

= Ds (cid:52)s − ρs

(cid:19)

+ σa

(cid:18) sa2
(cid:19)
(cid:18) sa2
1 + κab2 − a

1 + κab2

+ σs .

(9a)

(9b)

This primary pattern triggers an activator-inhibitor system
(b, h) producing boundaries around the mounds of a.

∂b
∂t

= Db (cid:52)b +
s2

(cid:20)

ρb

1 + κbab2

(cid:18) b2
(cid:0) b2 − h(cid:1) .

h

+ σb

(cid:19)

(cid:21)

− b

(10a)

(10b)

= Dh (cid:52)h + ρh

∂h
∂t
The a-concentration modiﬁes the saturation value of the
activator b in Eq. (10a). A high value of a makes this satu-
ration so strong that the (b, h) system is set off. In regions
of low a, it’s the other way round : the saturation becomes
weak enough so that the (b, h) system triggers the forma-
tion of a stripe-like boundary. This effect is enhanced by
the substrate s, through the term ρbs2 in (10a). In other
words, the stripes will appear along sites with high con-
centration of s, in regions that are most distant from the
maxima of a. Due to the action of h, the stripes become
sharp. The weak feedback of b onto a in equation (9a) is
not absolutely necessary but speeds up the development
of the structure. The model has size regulation proper-
ties. New boundaries are inserted whenever a domain
becomes too large. This has the following reason. With
growth, the distance between the a maxima increases. If
a certain distance is surpassed, a maximum splits into
two and displacement towards higher substrate concen-
tration follows. Between these two maxima, a new region
with high substrate concentration appears that, in turn,
initiates a new b line. Such a process can be observed in
ﬁgure 10c.

As a possible application of the mechanism (9)–(10)
let us shortly mention the barrel formation in mouse brain
(Steindler et al., 1989 ; Jacobson, 1991). The facial vib-
rissae of the mouse project on the primary somatosen-
sory cortex (Fig. 10b). The mapping on the brain mirrors
the arrangement of whiskers on the mouse face : two ad-
jacent vibrissae project on neighboring sites in the cor-
tex ; the domain connected to a given whiskers is called
barrel. The shape of the barrels can be visualized by
a labelling with tenascin speciﬁc antibodies. During the
ﬁrst postnatal days, the barrel pattern has dynamic prop-
erties : removal of vibrissae disrupts the formation of the
associated barrels. The model gives a good description
of such dynamic effects if one admits that the autocat-
alytic production rate of activator a is linked to neural ex-
citation by the whiskers. Destruction of the latter leads to
a reduction of neural excitation, to a decrease of a and
so, to the resorption of the associated barrel whose area
is then invaded by its neighbors.

Figure 10: Polygonal structures. (a) The left posterior wing of
a dragonﬂy (Libellula depressa) is strengthened by a ﬁne and
elegant network of veins (picture after S´eguy, 1973). The posi-
tions of the larger veins are presumably genetically coded. Ac-
cording to the model, ﬁner veins are produced during the wing
development ; during growth, their insertion tends to keep con-
stant the size of the enclosed domains. (b) Experimentally ob-
served barrel pattern in the mouse somatosensory cortex. The
dotted regions correspond to domains labelled by an antibody
against J1/tenascin (after Steindler et al., 1989).(c) Simulation
based on the system (9)–(10) in a two dimensional domain.
The density of dots is proportional to the concentration of b.
One can see the completion of a new boundary between two
domains (arrow).

5.3. The facetted eye of Drosophila ﬂies
As an example of a complex but very regular periodic
structure, we shall now discuss the formation of the
facetted eye of the fruit ﬂy Drosophila melanogaster. The
eye is derived from the eye-antennal imaginal disk.6
It
consists of a very regular array of about 700 ommatidia
(Fig. 11a). Each ommatidium is formed by the precise ar-
rangement of 20 cells among which 8 are photoreceptor
neurons named R1, . . ., R8. These clusters of 20 cells
have well deﬁned polarity and orientation in respect to
the main body axis.

The molecular basis of eye formation has been ex-
tensively studied over the last years. For comprehen-
sive reviews, see for instance Tomlinson (1988) or Basler
and Hafen (1991). The model presented hereafter repro-
duces essential aspects of this pattern formation.

The following steps play a crucial role (ﬁgure 11b).

a) A wave moves from posterior to anterior across the
eye imaginal disk. It causes a slight deformation in
the tissue, the morphogenetic furrow.

b) Within the furrow, a ﬁrst morphogenetic event takes

6In Drosophila larvae, imaginal disks are nests of epithelial tissue which
differentiate at metamorphosis. Legs, wings, antennae, eyes derive from imag-
inal disks (Alberts et al., 1989).

11

could lead to an irreproducible receptor number).

The fate of a cell is only determined by the interac-
tions with its neighbors, and not by its lineage (Ready
et al., 1976). The system is therefore very convenient
to study the interactions required to achieve a complex
periodic structure. Moreover, the pattern formation takes
place in a monolayered epithelium ; it is a strictly two di-
mensional process.

We propose here a model which accounts for the ﬁrst
morphogenetic steps up to the formation of the R1 and
R6 receptors. The cell fate is assumed to be hierarchi-
cally determined in a cascade :
furrow −→ R8 cells −→ M cells −→ R2/5 cells −→ ···
In the following, a model for each individual step will be
described. The hierarchical interactions postulated are
summarized in Fig. 12a.

5.3.1. The morphogenetic furrow
The differentiation of cells behind a spreading wave indi-
cates that, in the eye, the precise arrangement of struc-
tures is achieved by the scheme of simulated growth
mentioned in section 4.
In this way, each subsequently
formed structure achieves a precise spacing with respect
to the structures already laid down.

The morphogenetic furrow is modeled as a wave-
like event which moves across the system. This is in
agreement with the experiments of White (1961) where
grafting of epithelium tissue in the eye imaginal disk of
mosquitoes allowed him to observe the furrow spreading
through holes of the grafted tissue or moving around it
like a wave.

The following equations have been used to simulate

the wave that generates the furrow :

sf 2

(11a)

= −ρssf 2 .

= Df(cid:52)f + ρf

1 + κf f 2 − µf f

∂f
∂t
∂s
∂t
Suppose that initially s = 1 and f = 0 everywhere, except
in one cell where f = fo. Due to diffusion, this cell ac-
tivates the production of f in its vicinity [the term Df(cid:52)f
in Eq. (11a) plays the role of σext in (5) ]. But, since the
substrate s is depleted, f cannot remain in its high state
and goes back to zero. This produces a wave front of f
which spreads once over the eye disk.

(11b)

The furrow model (11) is certainly a simpliﬁcation. It
does not match all experimental data. A shift of ﬂy em-
bryos to non-permissive temperatures causes a stop in
the motion of the furrow. When shifted back to normal
temperatures, the furrow continues as if nothing hap-
pened. The model is not well suited to reproduce this ex-
periment : it would require a simultaneous decrease of ρs
and of Df . The change of both parameters at the same
time by the temperature shift is unlikely and indicates a
more complex way of wave formation. For our purpose,

Figure 11: Overall structure of the Drosophila eye and its
genesis.
(a) Scanning electron micrograph of the eye of a
Drosophila ﬂy showing the regular array of ommatidia (photo-
graph kindly provided by J. Berger). (b) Pattern formation of
the Drosophila eye. A morphogenetic furrow F sweeps ante-
riorly across the eye-antennal imaginal disk (the arrows show
the direction of propagation). Behind the furrow, ommatidial
assembly begins with the differentiation of regularly spaced
R8 photoreceptors, each one associated with one or two mys-
tery cells M. Later R2 and R5 neurons are recruited, followed
by the formation of R3, R4, R1, R6 and, at last, R7 receptors ;
M cells are meanwhile eliminated by selective cell death. Af-
ter formation of all photoreceptors, 12 other cells are added in
every ommatidium (cone, pigment and bristle cells). Dots in-
dicate differentiating cells while hatches show differently dif-
ferentiated cells.

place. It leads to the formation of regularly spaced
clusters of 6 or 7 cells including one photoreceptor
neuron R8 and one or two mystery cells M.

c) In the cluster around R8, three pairs of photorecep-
tors differentiate sequentially, ﬁrst R2 and R5, then
R3 and R4 followed by R1 and R6 ; at last, R7 is
formed. During this stage, the mystery cells M are
eliminated by selective cell death.

d) Finally the cluster of 8 photoreceptors recruits other
cells in order to form the cone, pigment and bristle
cells.

The eight photoreceptors R1–R8 belong at least to three
types, namely R1–R6, R7 and R8. Receptors R7 and
R8 have clearly distinct functions as appears from their
morphology (Tomlinson, 1988). Whether R1–R6 are dif-
ferent is unclear (Heberlein et al., 1991). At least, the
differentiation pathways shows that there are three cou-
ples of similar receptors, R1/6, R2/5 and R3/4. If the six
neurons R1–R6 are functionally identical, a plausible ex-
planation for their sequential differentiation is to achieve a
precise regulation of the number of photoreceptors con-
tained in each ommatidia (differentiating them in one step

12

=>is the only substance with such a long diffusion range.
All subsequently determined cells (M, R2, R5, etc.) dif-
ferentiate under the inﬂuence of local
interactions re-
layed by direct contact with the R8 cells (Banerjee and
Zipursky, 1990).

5.3.3. Mystery cells M
The mystery cells M got their names because biologists
are, until now, unable to assign to them a role during
the eye formation ; some hours after their differentiation,
mystery cells die. The model suggests that M cells are
used in conjunction with R8 neurons to induce a local
polarity :
like an arrow, the couple R8–M points to the
furrow. This local remembrance is thought to be crucial
for the correct positioning of subsequent photoreceptors,
especially of R2/5. According to the model, the M cell
acts, in conjunction with R8, as an initial organizer for
ommatidial development by determining the primary ori-
entation of the cell cluster and by restricting the number
of cells which can choose the R2/5 fate. Perturbations
of the furrow motion, as in White’s (1961) experiment,
should lead to observable alterations of the initial cluster
orientation. This could be a test for the model.

The following interaction allows the activation of the

M cell adjacent to the R8 cell.

(13a)

∂aM
∂t

∂hM
∂t

= DaM (cid:52)aM + ρaM cM (aR8)

a2
M
hM

−µaM aM + σaM f

= DhM (cid:52)hM

(cid:0) a2

M − hM

(cid:1) + σhM .

+ρhM

(13b)
The function cM (aR8) simulates the transmission of a sig-
nal by cell-cell contact between the putative M cell and
the R8 neuron : this signal could, for instance, be relayed
by proteins laying on the cellular membrane of R8 neu-
rons. In the simulation, we chose

cM (aR8) =

aR8

1 + κM a2

R8

.

Due to this function, aR8 is required for the initiation of
the mystery cell ; but in reason of a disfavoring effect at
very high aR8 concentrations, it is not the R8 cell itself
but a neighboring cell in which aM activation takes place.
The term σaM f which couples the production of aM with
the furrow selects which of the R8 neighbors is chosen
to become a mystery cell. The trail of the f-wave makes
sure that M cells differentiate anteriorly to R8 neurons,
so that the couple R8–M is like an arrow pointing to the
furrow.

In the simulations, the precise positioning of M ante-
riorly to R8 is delicate ; ﬂuctuations disrupt easily this or-
der. It could be that a similar sensitivity exists in nature.
Experimentally it has been observed that cell movements
play an important role in local rearrangement during the
eye genesis (Tomlinson, 1988). In this way, small errors

Figure 12: Simulation of the eye development. (a) Scheme of
the hierarchical interactions used in the model. The furrow F
induces regularly spaced R8 neurons. These are needed to de-
velop M cells. Later, R8 and M cells cooperate to trigger the
differentiation of R2 and R5 neurons. At last, R8 and R2/5
neurons induce the formation of R3/4 and R1/6 receptors.
Except of the R8 spacing mechanism that involves long rang-
ing inhibition, all interactions are assumed to be mediated by
cell-cell contacts. (b) The structure resulting from the model.
The morphogenetic furrow F moves across the eye disk (the
arrows show the direction of spreading). It initiates the differ-
entiation of neural cells : a regular array of R8 photoreceptors
develops behind it. Mystery cells M differentiates immedi-
ately anteriorly to R8 receptors. Later R2 and R5 are formed.
The differentiation of R3/4 and R1/6 follows (these cells have
not been plotted for reasons of clarity).

however, the form (11) is sufﬁcient since we only need it
as a signal for beginning the neuronal differentiation.

5.3.2. The R8 photoreceptors
The morphogenetic wave triggers the differentiation of
neuronal cells R8. Experimental data point out that lat-
eral inhibition is essential for proper R8 spacing (Baker
et al., 1990 ; Harris, 1991). So R8 cells are best modeled
by an activator-inhibitor couple (aR8, hR8) :
− aR8
∂aR8

= DaR8 (cid:52)aR8 + ρaR8

∂t

+σaR8 f

∂hR8

∂t

= DhR8 (cid:52)hR8 + ρhR8

R8 − hR8

(12a)

(12b)

(cid:18) a2
(cid:0) a2

R8
hR8

(cid:19)
(cid:1) .

Cells begin to differentiate after they have been exposed
to the morphogenetic wave. In the model, activation de-
pends on the basic production term σaR8f in Eq. (12a).
Due to the lateral inhibition via hR8 only some cells be-
come fully activated and differentiate into R8 photorecep-
tors (Fig. 12b). These cells have a precise spacing with
respect to the previously activated R8 cells.

The diffusion range of the inhibitor hR8 is supposed to
be of the order of several cell diameters. In the model this

13

in the precise positioning of the M cells could be cor-
rected.

5.3.4. Recruitment of R2/5, R3/4 and R1/6 neurons
It is generally accepted that the subsequent differentia-
tion of the R2/5 and later of the R3/4 and R1/6 pho-
toreceptors is a consequence of cell-cell contacts. In the
model, interactions with the R8 and M cells directs an
undifferentiated cell to choose the R2/5 fate. Conversely,
newly formed R2/5 neurons inhibit their neighbors to fol-
low the same pathway. Later, other cells differentiate into
R3/4 and R1/6 receptors, due to contact with R8 and
R2/5 neurons. Again, R3/4 and R1/6 receptors prevent
other cells in their vicinity from choosing the same fate.

These considerations suggest that equations govern-
ing the R2/5, R3/4 and R1/6 neuronal pathway are of
the very same nature as those for R8 and M cells. For
instance, the R2/5 receptors are described by

∂aR2

∂t

∂hR2

∂t

= DaR2 (cid:52)aR2 + ρaR2 cR2(aR8, aM )

−µaR2aR2 + σaR2

= DhR2 (cid:52)hR2

(cid:0) a2

+ρhR2

R2 − hR2

a2
R2
hR2

(14a)

(14b)

(cid:1) + σhR2.

Cells with a high aR2 concentration become R2/5 neu-
rons (Fig. 12c). The function cR2 relays a signal from R8
and M cells to the presumptive R2/5 photoreceptors :

cR2(aR8, aM ) =

aR8

1 + κR2a2

R8

·

aM

1 + νR2a2
M

.

Note that cR2 depends on the product of two signals.
Both interactions with R8 and with M are simultaneously
required to induce the differentiation of R2/5 receptors.
Further differentiation of R1/6 and R3/4 photorecep-
tors uses the same scheme except that cR2(aR8, aM ) is
replaced by a function cR3(aR8, aR2) which mimics sur-
face contact with R8 and R2/5 neurons.

5.3.5. Abnormal eye patterns
Many mutations are known which alter the structure of
the compound eye. Four of them, rap (Karpilov et al.,
1989), Ellipse (Baker and Rubin, 1989), Notch (Har-
ris, 1991 ; Markopoulou and Artavanis-Tsakonas, 1991)
and scabrous (Baker et al., 1989) affect the positioning
and differentiation of R8 cells. Based on the pheno-
types of Ellipse and scabrous ﬂies, we suggest that El-
lipse is linked to the R8-activator aR8, while the diffusible
molecule encoded by scabrous may be the correspond-
ing inhibitor hR8.

In scabrous mutants,

the R8-inhibition is reduced.
This is modeled by increasing the value of ρhR8
in
Eq. (12b). For a given concentration of aR8, more hR8
is produced and this, in turn, decreases the amount of
both aR8 and hR8 ; as a consequence, R8 cells are less

14

spaced,
neurons are fused, as observed in scabrous mutants.

irregularly distributed and sometimes two R8

Notch mutants exhibit the same kind of reduced R8
spacing. Notch encodes for a transmembrane protein
that is believed to be a receptor for several extracellu-
lar signals. Among them is the signal relayed by the
scabrous protein. In this sense, the parameter ρaR8 has
to be a function of Notch. The model does not explicitly
take this Notch-dependance into account. But a mutation
making the Notch protein less effective for the reception
of the scabrous inhibition signal could decrease the value
of ρaR8 in Eq. (12a). Less activator is then produced ; this
decreases also the hR8 concentration and R8 are formed
too close to each other, as observed in Notch mutant.

The opposite result is achieved by increasing ρaR8 :
this enhances the production of aR8, leading this time
to an abnormally wide R8 spacing.
It is interesting to
note that the Ellipse mutation is believed to overactivate
the gene responsible for R8 differentiation, in accordance
with the considerations above.

It should be noted that the regulatory behaviors men-
tioned above are nontrivial consequence of the model :
if more inhibitor molecules are produced per activator
molecules, one achieves a decrease of the inhibitor con-
centration. This results from the nonlinear cross-reaction
between these two chemicals. This kind of regulatory be-
havior is not unique to eye development. Mutants have
been found in hydra, where a decrease of the head in-
hibitor production rate induces surprisingly an increase
of the head-bud spacing (Takano and Sugiyama, 1983).
Another mutation that disrupts the eye assembly is
rough (Heberlein et al., 1991). In rough mutants, devel-
opment of ommatidia occurs normally up to R2/5. But
R3/4 neurons fail their differentiation.
It has been sug-
gested (Tomlinson et al., 1988 ; Basler et al., 1990) that
rough controls in R2/5 photoreceptors the signal that in-
duces the R3/4 cell fate. In the model we would identify
the activity of rough with the signal cR3(aR8, aR2). Exper-
imentally it has been observed that rough expression is
high, ﬁrst, in the morphogenetic furrow and, later, in R2/5
and R3/4 cells (Kimmel et al., 1990). This corresponds
to the expectation of the model.

The model is already quite complex but is certainly
an oversimpliﬁcation. For instance, the exchange of in-
formation between the cells is much more sophisticated
than that just a substance leaking through some holes
into neighboring cells. A plausible mechanism would
rather involve signalling molecules that are inserted into
the membrane of one cell type and receptor molecules
exposed on other cells. “Relay molecules” will then trans-
mit the signal from the cell surface to the nucleus. There,
transcriptional regulation takes place that is ultimately re-
sponsible for the choice of the pathway. Nevertheless,
this signal transduction is presumably a more or less lin-
ear chain of events, so that the approximation by a single
substance exchanged by diffusion is reasonable.

Although the model seems complex, its building fol-

lows a straightforward way, consisting of the successive
addition of elements whose properties are well under-
stood. These “building blocks” include wave formation,
production of regular structures by simulated growth and
fate induction in a neighboring cell. Though each single
element has well deﬁned characteristics, one learns from
these models where the critical steps are. For instance,
it turned out that the generation of polarity in the periodic
array of receptors is a delicate step which is facilitated by
the addition of a mystery cell.

5.4. Positioning mechanisms during plant growth
As a last example of a complex structure, we describe a
model that allows the precise positioning of organs dur-
ing the development of plants.

Plant growth mainly occurs by cell division in special-
ized tissues called meristems. The shoot apex meristem
is a cone of undifferentiated cells located at the tip of
stems ; its cells undergo frequent mitosis. Somewhat be-
hind the tip, the primordia are formed (Fig. 13). These
will develop into leaves or ﬂower organs. The determina-
tion of the positions at which primordia appear is believed
to involve some inhibition mechanism (Schoute, 1913 ;
Thornley, 1975 ; Marzec and Kappraff, 1983 ; Koch et al.,
1994). Several models have been proposed to explain
the precise positioning of primordia. They are based ei-
ther on the exchange of diffusible molecules (Meinhardt,
1982 ; Yotsumoto, 1993 ; Bernasconi, 1994) or on stress
and pressure in the tissue (Adler, 1974, 1977a, 1977b ;
Green and Poethig, 1982). A pattern very similar to phyl-
lotaxis can be generated by physical
ingredients only.
Under suitable conditions, swimming and each other re-
pelling droplets of a magnetic ﬂuid also produce helical
arrangement (Douady and Couder, 1992).

Although a single activator-inhibitor system is able to
account for the basic modes of leaf arrangement (distic-
hous, decussate, helical) (Mitchison, 1977 ; Richter and
Schranner, 1978 ; Meinhardt, 1982), it is easy to see that
more complicated systems are involved. We shall dis-
cuss the necessary extensions in several steps.

Leaf initiation can take place only in a small zone at
some distance from the tip of a growing shoot. Further,
a signal must be available which speciﬁes where apical
meristem is located. This suggests that at least two pat-
tern forming systems are involved. The ﬁrst one deter-
mines the position of the meristem. The second system
generates leaves. The latter is controlled by the ﬁrst one :
on one hand, the meristem system represses leave ini-
tiation at the tip but, on the other hand, it generates the
precondition for this process in its vicinity (Fig. 13). This
is analogous to the Drosophila eye development where a
mystery cell M can only emerge in the neighborhood of
a photoreceptor R8. Therefore, leaf initiation is restricted
to a narrow zone at the border of the apical meristem. A
similar process takes place in the freshwater polyp Hy-
dra :
initiation of tentacles takes place only in a whorl

around the mouth opening (Meinhardt, 1993).
However, even this more complex model

is insufﬁ-
cient. After leaf initiation, axillary meristems are formed
adjacent to the leaf primordia. They are always located
on the side pointing towards the tip of the shoot. These
meristematic regions don’t lead immediately to cell pro-
liferation but they can give rise to a new shoot after the
original shoot is removed. Moreover, leaves obtain very
soon a polarity on their own in that their upper and lower
surface become different from each other [this process is
probably induced by the neighborhood of the leaf (Sus-
sex, 1955) ]. The situation is therefore similar to the one
described above for eye development since several dif-
ferent structures are generated in a precise periodic ar-
rangement and with a predictable orientation.

A key for the understanding of this complex pattern
is its modular character (Lyndon, 1990). The elemen-
tary unit (the module) produced by a growing shoot con-
sists of a node and internode segment associated with
a leaf primordium and an axillary bud (Fig. 13). Leaves
are always located at the top of a module, in the nodal
region ; axillary buds differentiate close to leaves and im-
mediately above them. Stem elongation takes place in
the internodal region (Zobel, 1989a, 1989b).

In the following, we shall propose a model based on
this modular structure that accounts for the precise ax-
ial and azimutal positioning of leaf primordia and axillary
buds on the stem. The model also includes a control of
meristematic activity after tip removal. Since most of the
primary morphogenetic events affect only one or two sur-
face cell layer(s), we shall idealize the plant as a hollow
cylinder.

5.4.1. The apical shoot meristem
The apical meristem located at the tip of stems represses
the activity of the buds in its vicinity. The apical domi-
nance decreases as the distance between the apex and
a given bud increases with growth. This regulation is
known to be mediated by phytohormones like auxins
(Snow, 1940 ; K¨uhn, 1965).

We take into account two properties of the meris-
tem. The ﬁrst one, modeled by a switch system aM ,
tells whether a cell belongs to the apical meristem type
(aM = 1) or not (aM = 0). A second switching system
aA controls whether the meristem is active, i.e., whether
cells are undergoing frequent mitosis (aA = 1) or stay in
a latent state (aA = 0). A further substance hA mediates
the repression of axillary bud activity. It is produced in ac-
tive shoot meristems and could correspond to the phyto-
hormone mentioned above. It must be of very long range
in order to suppress the meristematic activity in distant
axillary buds. This rapid spread must not result from
diffusion. Indeed, auxin is actively transported from the
shoot towards the root (Snow, 1940 ; K¨uhn, 1965). The
(auxin) concentration hA has to sink below a given level
before an axillary meristem can become active causing

15

Figure 13: The modular construction of a plant and its simulation. (a) Cross-section through the growing tip of a shoot. The apical
shoot meristem A is a tissue in which rapid cell division occurs. At its periphery the primordia P which will grow into leaves L
appear. Axillary buds B differentiate somewhat later, in proximity of a leaf. The shoot can be regarded as a periodic repetition
of an “elementary module” M formed by a node N and internode I region ; every nodal-internodal segment bears a leaf L and an
axillary bud B. Each module M acquires an intrinsic polarity thanks to the iteration of at least three subunits, m1, m2 and m3.
(b) Simulation of plant growth. The stem of the plant is idealized as a cylinder which is represented here unwrapped. The apical
meristem A contributes to the stem elongation by addition on new cells. These differentiate so as to produce the repetitive sequence
. . . m1 m2 m3 m1 m2 m3 . . . rendered here by three grey levels in the background. The m1 − m2 border acts as a positional signal
for the differentiation of primordia P , identiﬁed with regions of high ap concentration. The overlap of the primordium on the three
compartments (m1, m2 and m3) can be used to trigger the development of an axillary bud B (aM = 1) on the m1 segment and of a
leaf having its upper and lower face on the m2 and m3 segments respectively. Note that the primordia are placed along spirals with
a 2/3 phyllotaxis (the azimutal distance between two successive primordia is approximately equal to 2/3th of the stem perimeter).
Once an axillary bud is sufﬁciently distant from the apical meristem, it becomes active (aA = 1, rendered by black squares).

16

)2* !+EH?KBAHA?A=>cell proliferation and a lateral shoot. This can occur ei-
ther after substantial growth or after removal of an exist-
ing dominant tip.

The apical shoot meristem is assumed to establish a
positional information system in its vicinity (Holder, 1979)
to account for the observation that leaf primordia always
appear at a ﬁxed distance of the shoot apex. Such a
positional information is established if the active cells of
the meristem produce a diffusible substance bA. Its local
concentration provides a measure for the distance from
the meristem.

The previous considerations suggest the following

system to describe the shoot apex meristem.

a) Meristematic identity aM :

∂aM
∂t

= ρM

a2
M

1 + κM a2
M

− aM

+ σM m1ap.

(cid:21)

(15)

In the young plant, apical meristem is only found in
the shoot apex, so that initially aM = 0 everywhere
except at the top of the stem, where aM = 1. Dur-
ing apical growth, meristem is laid down in axillary
buds. The term proportional to σM will be explained
later ; it corresponds to an external signal inducing
the formation of an axillary bud.

b) Activity aA of the meristem:

∂aA
∂t

= ρA

a2
A

1 + κAa2
A

aM

1 + νAhA

− aA

.

+σA

(cid:21)

(16)

(cid:20)

(cid:20)

The meristem activity is initiated by the signal pro-
portional to σA. Due to the repression by hA (see
here after), a bud has to reach a given distance to
the apex before it can become active.

c) Long ranging inhibitor hA of meristematic activity:

∂hA
∂t

= DhA(cid:52)hA + ρhA ( aA − hA )

(17)

It is used to repress the bud activity until a given
distance is achieved between the bud and the
shoot apex [see the term proportional to σA in
Eq. (16) ].

d) Positional information system bA :

∂bA
∂t

= DbA(cid:52)bA + ρbAaA − µbAbA.

(18)

Due to bA, new cells begin their differentiation only
at a given distance of the shoot apex, on the meris-
tem periphery [see Eq. 19) and Eq. (20) ].

17

5.4.2. Building of the nodal-internodal module
Cells newly produced by mitosis in the apex “recede”
from the tip of the stem. As soon as they are far enough
from the meristem, they undergo differentiation.
In the
model, they get the information on their distance to the
apical meristem from the local concentration of the sub-
stance bA. To account for the nodal character of leaf ini-
tiation we propose that there is a serial repetition of at
least three cell states, say m1, m2 and m3 ; the stem of a
plant corresponds then to a succession of cell states like
. . . m1m2m3 / m1m2m3 /m1 . . . The borders between m1
and m2, m2 and m3, m3 and m1, will be used in the fur-
ther elaboration of the model to initiate either polar leaves
or axillary bud meristems. The ordered succession of the
three states m1, m2 and m3 deﬁnes a module ; the jux-
taposition of m1 and m3 corresponds to the boundary of
such a module.

The following set of equations produces, under suit-
able growth conditions, such a repetitive sequence
(Fig. 13b).

(cid:34)

(cid:0) m2

= ρmi

hi

+σmi

i−1 + κmim2

i + m2

i+1

m2
i

(cid:0) m2

(cid:1)

= Dhi(cid:52)hi + ρhi

i − mi+1hi

(cid:35)

(cid:1) − mi

(19a)

∂mi
∂t

∂hi
∂t

+ σhibA

(19b)
where i = 1, 2, 3 and with the cyclic identiﬁcations m0 ≡
m3, m4 ≡ m1. Equations for (mi, hi) are of the activator-
inhibitor type. By construction, mi and mi±1 are locally
exclusive states due to the terms m2
i±1 in the denomi-
nator of (19a) ; mi+1 favors the appearance of mi in its
vicinity since it increases the removal rate of inhibitor hi.
The set of equations given above is, of course, only
an example of a system producing a repetitive sequence.
Important is that cell states locally exclude each other but
activate each other on long range (Meinhardt and Gierer,
1980). Such mechanisms have the tendency to form nar-
row stripes since in this arrangement cells of a particular
type are close to cells of the other types that are required
for their stabilization.

It is quite amazing to observe the similarity between
the above proposed model for modular growth of plants
and a model for the segmentation of insects (Meinhardt,
1986, 1991). In both cases, the iteration of at least three
cell states generates the periodic polar structure and the
borders between the elements are later used for accu-
rate positioning of organs (leaves and axillary buds in
plants, imaginal disks and segment borders in insects).
The model for insect segmentation has found meanwhile
much support from observation on the molecular level.
The system (19) also shares resemblance with the hy-
percycle concept proposed for prebiotic evolution (Eigen,
1971 ; Eigen and Schuster, 1979) :
the “species” mi
are autocatalytic and compete with each other. But no

species can outcompete the others since it depends on
them because of the help of mi+1 that enhances the pro-
duction rate of mi.

5.4.3. Leaf primordia and axillary buds
Once a repetitive pattern . . . m1 m2 m3 m1 . . . has been
laid down it provides a convenient framework to initiate
leaves and axillary buds along the axis. Two possibilities
exist :

a) either a given structure can only appear in cells with

a particular determination, for instance in m1, or

b) the boundary between two elements, say m1 and
m2, is required to initiate the development of that
structure.

These two ways lead to quite different predictions : sup-
pose that m2 is lost due to a mutation ; in the ﬁrst case,
this will not affect the formation of a leaf while, in the sec-
ond situation, no leaves appears, due to the loss of the
m1−m2 border. The second solution insures in principle,
a ﬁner positioning since a border is always sharp. But
most important, the border has a polarity. If, for instance,
the signal for primordia formation can be generated only
on a m1 − m2 border, one can use the overlap of the
primordium on m1 to produce the axillary bud, while the
overlap on m2 triggers the formation of a leaf. The rela-
tive position of a bud and a leaf, the one in front of the
other, is necessarily correct. Furthermore, if the signal
inducing the primordium is sufﬁciently broad, it can also
extend in the m3 region. Let us suppose that m2 cells
can only produce the upper side and the m3 cells only the
lower side of a leaf : the polarity of the leaf is then ﬁxed.
If further proliferation is restricted to those cells that are
close to the m2 − m3 border, it is clear that the leaf will
become ﬂat although the signal inducing the primordium
formation has a conical shape.

To account for the features of lateral inhibition in leaf
initiation we use an activator-inhibitor system (ap, hp)
coupled to the modular pattern in such a way that the
activator peaks are initiated on m1 − m2 borders :
∂ap
∂t

= Dap(cid:52)ap + ρap h1m2

a2
p
hp

− µap ap + σap

(20a)

∂hp
∂t

= Dhp(cid:52)hp + ρhp a2

(cid:0) ρhp + µhp m3

p −

(cid:1) hp + σhp bA .

(20b)
Due to the term ρap h1m2 in (20a), leaves appear near to
the m1 − m2 borders (Fig. 13b). Moreover, the removal
rate of hp is increased in m3. This accounts for the ob-
servation that the inhibition of primordia is much more
effective along the shoot apex margin than axially along
the stem axis (the inhibitory effect is of the order of mag-
nitude of the apex diameter d but the axial separation of
primordia is much lower than d).

At last, each leaf induces the formation of an axillary
bud in its immediate upper neighborhood, in the m3 re-
gion (Fig. 13b). Apical meristem is laid down in buds un-
der the inﬂuence of the source term σM m1hp appearing
in Eq. (15) : this term is only high in m1 subsegments, in
the close vicinity of a leaf primordium.
The newly created apical meristem remains quies-
cent (i.e., aA ≈ 0) as long as the concentration of the
meristematic activity inhibitor hA remains high. Its activ-
ity starts only when the inhibition sinks below a threshold
[see the term proportional to σA in (16) ]. This can occur
after cutting the shoot apex (Bonner and Galston, 1952)
or after substantial growth that enlarges the distance be-
tween the active apical meristem and the quiescent bud.
The model is so far hypothetical. No gene system
is yet known that could be responsible for the nodal-
internodal structure. One reason could be that a corre-
sponding mutation would have a too severe impact on
the plant embryo since, for instance, no leaves would
be formed. Since the (at least) three elements depend
on each other, the loss of one element can eliminate
the others. Based on genetic observations Coen and
Meyerowitz (1991) have proposed a somewhat related
mechanisms for the determination of the character of ﬂo-
ral structures (serpals, petals, carpals and stamen), but
not for their positioning.

The model provides a feasible mechanism for essen-
tial elements of plant morphogenesis. It gives clues how
polarity is established in the substructures.
It predicts
that the modular nodal-internodal structure is laid down
before the initiation of leaf primordia and axillary buds.
The rapidly growing data on the molecular-genetic level
in plant morphogenesis will certainly provide a crucial
test in the near future.

6. CONCLUSION

We intended to show that simple reaction-diffusion equa-
tions describing the interactions of few chemicals provide
an efﬁcient way to understand numerous aspects of pat-
tern formation in biology. Graded concentration proﬁles,
periodic and stripe-like patterns can be generated out of
an initially more or less homogeneous state. The regu-
latory properties of these mechanisms agree with many
biological observations, for instance, the regeneration of
a pattern with or without maintenance of polarity, inser-
tion of new structures during growth in the largest inter-
stices or the generation of strictly periodic structures dur-
ing marginal growth. By a hierarchical coupling of sev-
eral such systems, highly complex pattern can be gener-
ated. One pattern directs a subsequent pattern and so
on. Complex structures are well known from physics, for
instance in turbulence. But in contrast, the complex pat-
terns discussed here are highly reproducible (as well in
their time development as in their spatial organization), a
feature of obvious importance in biology.

Very distinct biological systems can be simulated by

18

the assumption of basically similar mechanisms. For in-
stance, the regular initiation of new leaves with their in-
trinsic polarity during plant growth and the genesis of the
complex arrays of receptor cells in the developing eye of
Drosophila are achieved by marginal growth (either real
or “simulated” growth). A polarizing inﬂuence from the
structure that organizes the growth, i.e., the tip of the
shoot or the morphogenetic furrow, ensures the correct
arrangement of the many periodically arranged substruc-
tures.

The models suggest another example of such conver-
gence. Both the periodic pattern of insect segments and
the nodal arrangement of leaves in plants are presum-
ably achieved by the serial repetition of at least three cell
states. The corresponding model for insects has been
meanwhile experimentally veriﬁed. All this indicates that
very distantly related organisms have developed very
similar mechanisms for pattern formation.

Experiments indicate that biological systems are, as
the rule, much more complex than expected from the the-
oretical models. This has many reasons. On one hand,
to bring a molecule from one cell to the next and transmit
the signal to the cell’s nucleus is often realized in biology
by a complex chain of biochemical events, but described
in the model by the mere diffusion of a substance. On the
other hand, the autocatalysis of a substance may involve
several steps ; for instance, a small diffusible molecule
may be able to activate a particular gene, that, in turn,
controls the synthesis of the small molecule. The gene
goosecoid and the small molecule Activin (Izpisuabel-
monte et al., 1993), both involved in the generation of the
primary organizing region of Amphibians, may function in
this way.

Particular developmental steps have been treated as
if they were isolated from the rest of the organism. In re-
ality, they have to be integrated with many other events.
The whole process has to take place at a given position
within the complex organism and in a particular time win-
dow. Further, a particular developmental stage must be
reached before speciﬁc subsequent steps can start. For
instance, the pattern on the growing shoot must be com-
patible with its later transformation into a very different
structure : a ﬂower. During evolution, only modiﬁcations
of existing mechanisms and the addition of new ones are
allowed ; a new rational construction from the beginning
is impossible.
Of course,

there is a strong selective pressure to
make biological organisms reliable, not to make them
simple. Complexity is not a problem for biological sys-
tems. For instance, a particular step can be made safe
by a second parallel and independent process as is of-
ten the case in technical processes too (Goodwin et al.,
1993). That sometimes severe mutations, for instance in
Drosophila development, produce only a mild phenotype
supports such a view.
If the corresponding models are
then more complex too, one should not blame the theo-
reticians !

19

So far, no biological system able to generate primary
pattern formation has been completely characterized at
the molecular level. However, molecular biology is mak-
ing tremendous progresses and we hope that the next
few years will bring more evidence for the models and ex-
plain how the postulated mechanisms are actually imple-
mented in the real systems. Nevertheless, we hope that
the reader is convinced that the theoretical treatment of
biological pattern formation is feasible and provides es-
sential insights into the beautiful processes of life.

Acknowledgments

We express our gratitude to Professor A. Gierer.
Much of the basic ideas described here emerged from
a fruitful collaboration with him. One of us (A.J.K.) has to
thank the Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Entwicklungsbiologie in
T¨ubingen for its hospitality during the course of this work,
and the Swiss National Fund for Scientiﬁc Research for
ﬁnancial support during the same period.

7. Stability analysis

The stability analysis is not included in the reformatting.
Please refer to the original paper:
http://rmp.aps.org/abstract/RMP/v66/i4/
p1481_1

8. Parameter sets

Numerical results described in this paper have been ob-
tained by implementing the models on a desktop com-
puter. Numerical
integration of the partial differential
equations has been performed by use of standard dis-
cretization methods. The concentration of the various
chemical species a, h . . . is evaluated on a two dimen-
sional square grid with mesh δx ; any grid point is then
deﬁned by a two indexes i and j : xi j = (i δx , j δx). In
two dimensions, the Laplace operator (cid:52) applied to any
function a(x, t) is taken as :
(cid:52)a(xi j, t) = (a(xi+1 j, t) + a(xi j+1, t) + a(xi−1 j, t)
+a(xi j−1, t) − 4a(xi j, t) )/δx2
Time is also discretized, tk = k δt, and the time derivative
is approximated by

a(x, tk+1) − a(x, tk)

.

δt

a(x, tk) =

∂
∂t
In all simulations, we have chosen δx = δt = 1. As a
consequence, the border lengths of the integration do-
main are directly equal to the number of cells along them,
and the time t is equal to the number of iteration steps.
In the simulations, spatial concentration ﬂuctuations are
assumed ; their order of magnitude is between 3 and 10
per cent of the concentration value.

Hereafter are listed the parameter sets used to pro-

duce the various pictures presented in the text.

Figure 1

We used equations (1). Periodic boundary conditions
Initial conditions are given by the homo-
are assumed.
geneous steady state of the system. Fig. 1a and 1b are
calculated with the same constants but respectively in
ﬁelds of dimension 30 × 30 and 50 × 50. The parameter
values used for these two pictures are listed below.

Figure 5
The picture is based on Eq. (1). The boundary condi-
tions are tight ; the ﬁeld grows from 8 × 8 to 52 × 52 cells.
One line and one column of cells are added at the top
border and at the right side after every 2000th iteration.
The system starts initially out of its homogeneous steady
state.

α Dα
a
h

0.005
0.2

ρα
0.01
0.02

µα
0.01
0.02

σα
0.0
–

κα
0.0
–

α Dα
a
h

0.006
0.2

ρα
0.01
0.02

µα
0.01
0.02

σα
0.001
0.0

κα
0.0
–

Fig. 1c is calculated in a 50 × 50 ﬁeld with the same pa-
rameters except for κa = 0.25.

Figure 2
Equations used are (3). The boundary conditions are
periodic and the ﬁeld size is 30 × 30 for picture (a) and
50 × 50 for (b) and (c). All computations start from the
homogeneous steady state. The parameters values for
the cases (a) and (b) are given here after.

Figure 6

The sea-urchin simulation uses Eq. (1). Boundaries
are tight ; the one dimensional ﬁeld grows from 5 to 50
cells, one cell being added at a random position after ev-
ery 2000th iteration. The system is initially homogeneous.
When the system reaches a size of 50 cells, it is cut in
two parts having tight boundaries. After the cut, no fur-
ther growth is assumed.

α Dα
a
s

0.005
0.2

ρα
0.01
0.02

µα
0.01
–

σα
0.0
0.02

κα
0.0
–

α Dα
a
h

0.005
0.2

ρα
0.0005
0.00075

µα
0.0005
0.00075

σα
0.00005
0.00025

κα
0.0
–

Picture (c) is calculated with the same parameters except
for κa = 0.25. Note the correspondence with the param-
eters of ﬁgure 1.

Figure 3

The picture is computed with (5) in a one dimensional
ﬁeld formed by 30 cells. Initially, y = 0 everywhere ; the
external source σext decreases linearly from 0.35 on the
left side, to 0.175 on the right side.

α ρα
y

0.05

µα
0.05

κα
0.2

Figure 4
The picture is computed with Eq. (1). The boundary
conditions are tight and the ﬁeld grows from 21×21 to 31×
31 cells. One cell line and one cell column are added at
random positions after every 2000th iteration. The system
is initially in its homogeneous steady state.

α Dα
a
h

0.0025
0.2

ρα
0.01
0.02

µα
0.01
0.02

σα
0.005
0.02

κα
0.0
–

Figure 7

Equation used are (7). The domain is one dimen-
sional, initially composed of 20 cells. Zero ﬂux boundary
conditions are assumed and the system starts from its
homogeneous steady state. The ﬁeld grows by addition
of one cell at a random position after every 5000th itera-
tion. When a size of 100 cells is reached, the domain is
cut in two equal parts with zero-ﬂux boundaries and the
system is iterated without further growth until equilibrium
is reached.

α Dα
a
h
b

0.002
0.2
–

ρα
2 ·10−4
2 ·10−4
4 ·10−5

σα
1 · 10−5
–
–

Figure 9
The three pictures are based on Eq. (8). The ﬁeld
has a size of 120 × 65 cells in (a), and 80 × 80 cells in (b)
and (c). For the three plots, the boundary conditions are
periodic. The initial state is given by a = 0, s = 3 and
y = 0 everywhere except on some randomly scattered
point Pi where a = 5.

Here are the parameters used for the giraffe coat (a).

20

α Dα
a
s
y

0.015
0.03
–

ρα
0.025
0.0025
0.03

µα
–
0.00075
0.003

σα
–
0.00225
0.00015

κα
0.1
20.0
22.0

To produce the leopard coat (b) we have replaced the
initial conditions on s by s = 2.5, and on a by a = 2 at the
positions Pi. The parameters involved are listed here.

α Dα
0.01
a
0.1
s
–
y

ρα
0.05
0.0035
0.03

µα
–
0.003
0.003

σα
–
0.0075
0.00007

κα
0.5
0.3
22.0

At last, the next data set produces the spots on the chee-
tah (d).

α Dα
a
s
y

0.015
0.1
–

ρα
0.025
0.0025
0.03

µα
–
0.00075
0.003

σα
–
0.00225
0.00015

κα
0.5
1.0
22.0

Figure 10
Equation (9)–(10) are integrated in a ﬁeld of initial di-
mension 50 × 80 ; one line and one column of cells are
added at random positions after every 500th iteration, up
to a dimension of 70×100 cells. The boundary conditions
are periodic. One begins with the system in its homoge-
neous steady state.

α Dα
0.01
a
0.2
s
0.0075
b
0.15
h

ρα
0.0025
0.003
0.01875
0.0375

σα
0.00025
0.003
0.00187
–

κα
0.1
–
0.2
–

Figure 12

The simulation is based on the set of equation (11)–
In this picture, the ﬁeld size is of 19 × 24 cells.
(14).
Boundaries are tight.
Initially, the furrow substrate s is
uniformly distributed (s = 1) and the furrow activator f is
everywhere zero, except on four regularly spaced cells at
the bottom of the ﬁeld, where f = 2 (this initial regular-
ity is not necessary ; if f = 2 on the whole bottom line
of the ﬁeld, a regular structure emerges too, but the R8
cells need three or four rows to ﬁnd their optimal spac-
ing). The other activators and inhibitors have all a very
low initial concentration, say 0.01.

21

Dα
α
0.0025
f
–
s
0.0025
aR8
0.2
hR8
0.001
aM
hM 0.02
0.002
aR2
0.01
hR2

ρα
0.1
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.0125
0.02
0.75
0.02

µα
0.011
–
–
–
0.01
–
0.01
–

σα
–
–
0.02
–
0.0004
0.0002
0.0001
0.0001

κα
0.2
–
–
–
0.4
–
4.0
–

να
–
–
–
–
–
–
500
–

Figure 13

Figure 13 The simulation is based on the set of equa-
tion (15)–(20). Zero ﬂux boundary conditions are im-
posed at the top and bottom border and periodic ones
at the left and right sides of the ﬁeld. The initial ﬁeld
size is 36 × 3. In the simulations, aM and aA have been
rescaled so that the upper stable steady state is found
at aM = aA = 3 instead of aM = aA = 1 as described
in the text. Initially, meristem (aM = 3) is only found on
the top line of the domain ; elsewhere, aM = 0. The
other activator and inhibitor have respectively 0.01 and
1.0 as initial concentrations. The domains grows by ad-
dition of one cell line after every 1500th iteration (the line
is inserted two lines below the apical meristem) up to a
size of 36 × 87 cells.

The parameters used for the simulation are listed in

the following table.

Dα

α
aM –
–
aA
0.2
hA
0.2
bA
–
mi
0.05
hi
0.004
ap
0.2
hp

ρα
0.01
0.01
0.005
0.7
0.002
0.01
0.005
0.01

µα
–
–
–
0.1
–
–
0.01
0.02

σα
0.00015
0.002
–
–
0.0004
0.011
0.001
0.1

κα
0.2222
0.2222
–
–
0.1
–
–
–

να
–
75
–
–
–
–
–
–

For m3, the value of σm3 should be replaced by 0.0002.

References
Adler I. (1974). A model of contact pressure in phyllotaxis. J. theor.

Adler I. (1975). A model of space ﬁlling in phyllotaxis. J. theor. Biol.,

Biol., 45, 1–79.

53, 435–444.

Adler I. (1977a). The consequences of contact pressure in phyllotaxis.

J. theor. Biol., 65, 29–77.

Adler I. (1977b). An application of the contact pressure model of phyl-
lotaxis to the close packing of spheres around a cylinder in biological
ﬁne structure. J. theor. Biol., 67, 447–458.

Alberts B., D. Bray, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts, and J.D. Watson.
(1989). Molecular Biology of the Cell. Garland Publishing, Inc., New-
York.

Auchmuty J.F.G. and G. Nicolis. (1975). Bifurcation analysis of non-
linear reaction-diffusion equations — I. Evolution equations and the
steady state solutions. Bull. Math. Biol., 37, 323–365.

Bonner J.S. and A.W. Galston. (1952). Principles of Plant Physiology.

ica D, 68, 90–99.

Freeman, San Francisco.

Babloyantz A. (1977). Self-organization phenomena resulting from cell-

cell contact. J. theor. Biol., 68, 551–561.

Baker N.E., M. Mlodzik, and G.M. Rubin. (1990). Spacing differenti-
ation in the developing Drosophila eye : A ﬁbrinogen-related lateral
inhibitor encoded by scabrous. Science, 250, 1370–1377.

Baker N.E. and G.M. Rubin.

(1989). Effect on eye development of
dominant mutations in Drosophila homologue of the EGF receptor.
Nature, 340, 150–153.

Banerjee U. and S.L. Zipursky. (1990). The role of cell-cell interaction
in the development of the Drosophila visual system. Neuron, 4, 177–
187.

Bard J.B.L. (1977). A unity underlying the different zebra striping pat-

terns. J. Zool. Lond., 183, 527–539.

Bard J.B.L. (1981). A model for generating aspects of zebra and other

mammalian coat patterns. J. theor. Biol., 93, 363–385.

Basler K. and E. Hafen. (1991). Speciﬁcation of cell fate in the devel-

oping eye of Drosophila. BioEssays, 13, 621–631.

Basler K., D. Yen, A. Tomlinson, and E. Hafen. (1990). Reprogram-
ming cell fate in the Drosophila retina : transformation of R7 cells by
ectopic expression of rough. Genes & Development, 4, 728–739.

Bentil D.E. and J.D. Murray. (1993). On the mechanical theory for bio-

logical pattern formation. Physica D, 63, 161–190.

Berding C. and H. Haken. (1982). Pattern formation in morphogenesis.

J. Math. Biol., 14, 133–151.

Berking S. Zur Rolle von Modellen in der Entwicklungsbiologie).

In
Sitzugsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1981.

Bernasconi G.P. (1994). Reaction-diffusion model for phyllotaxis. Phys-

Boring L., M. Weir, and G. Schubiger. (1993). Egg ligation alters the
bcd protein gradient and segmentation gene expression in embryos
of Drosophila. Mechanism of Development, 42, 97–111.

B¨unning E. and H. Sagromsky.

Die Bildung des
Spalt¨offnungsmusters in der Blattepidermis. (Mit Anmerkungen ¨uber
weitere Musterbildungen.). Z. Naturforsch., 3b, 203–216.

(1948).

Castets V., E. Dulos, J. Boissonade, and P. de Kepper. (1990). Experi-
mental evidence of a sustained standing Turing-type nonequilibrium
chemical pattern. Phys. Rev. Lett., 64, 2953–2956.

Chandebois R. Histogenesis and morphogenesis in planarian regener-

ation). In Monogr. in Dev. Biol., volume XI. Karger, Basel, 1976.

Cocho G., R. P´erez-Pascual, J.L. Rius, and F. Soto. (1987). Discrete
systems, cell-cell interactions and color pattern of animals II. Clonal
theory and cellular automata. J. theor. Biol., 125, 437–447.

Coen E.S. and E.M. Meyerowitz. (1991). The war of the whorls : ge-
netic interactions controlling ﬂower development. Nature, 353, 31–
37.

Cooke J. and D. Summerbell.

(1980). Cell cycle and experimental
pattern duplication in the chick wing during embryonic development.
Nature, 287, 697–701.
Coxeter H.S.M. (1961).

Introduction to Geometry. John Wiley and

Sons, New York.

Crick F. (1970). Diffusion in embryogenesis. Nature, 225, 420–422.
Davidson D. (1983a). The mechanism of feather pattern development
in the chick. I. The time of determination of feather position. J. Em-
bryol. exp. Morph., 74, 245–259.

Davidson D. (1983b). The mechanism of feather pattern development
II. Control of the sequence of pattern formation. J.

in the chick.
Embryol. exp. Morph., 74, 261–273.

Diaz-Benjumea J., M.A.F. Gonzales-Gaitan, and A. Garcia-Bellido.
the wing vein pattern of

Developmental genetics of

(1989).
Drosophila. Genome, 31, 612–619.

Douady S. and Y. Couder (1992). Phyllotaxis as a self-organized pro-

cess. Phys. Rev. Lett., 68, 2068–2101.

Driever W. and Ch. N¨usslein-Volhard.

(1988). A gradient of bicoid

protein in Drosophila embryos. Cell, 54, 83–93.

Eigen M. (1971). Selforganization of matter and the evolution of biolog-

ical macromolecules. Naturwissenschaften, 10, 465–523.

Eigen M. and P. Schuster. (1979). The Hypercycle. Springer-Verlag,

Berlin.

Ermentrout B., J. Campbell, and G. Oster. (1989). A model for shell

patterns based on neural activity. The Veliger, 28, 369–388.

Flickinger R.A. and S.J. Coward. (1962). The induction of cephalic dif-
ferentiation in regenerating Dugesia dorotocephala in the presence
of normal head and in unwounded tails. Develop. Biol., 5, 179–204.
Garcia-Bellido A. and J.F. Decelis. (1992). Developmental genetics of
the venation pattern of Drosophila. Ann. Rev. Genetics, 26, 277–
304.

Gierer A. (1977). Biological features and physical concepts of pattern

formation exempliﬁed by Hydra. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol., 11, 17–59.

Gierer A. (1981). Generation of biological patterns and form : some
physical, mathematical, and logical aspects. Prog. Biophys. molec.
Biol., 37, 1–47.

Gierer A. and H. Meinhardt.

(1972). A theory of biological pattern

formation. Kybernetik, 12, 30–39.

Goodwin B.C., S. Kauffman, and J.D. Murray. (1993). Is morphogene-

sis an intrinsically robust process ? J. theor. Biol., 163, 135–144.

Goss R.J. (1974). Regeneration. Probleme–Experimente–Ergebnisse.

Georg Thieme Verlag, Stuttgart.

Granero M.I., A. Porati, and D. Zanacca. (1977). A bifurcation analysis
of pattern formation in a diffusion governed morphogenetic ﬁeld. J.
Math. Biol., 4, 21–27.

Green P.B. and R.S. Poethig. (198). Biophysics of the extension and
initiation of plant organs.
In Developmental Order : Its Origins and
Regulation. S. Subtelny and P.B. Green, editors, Allan R. Liss, Inc.,
New York

Haken H. (1977). Synergetics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Haken H. and H. Olbricht. (1978). Analytical treatment of pattern for-
mation in the Gierer-Meinhardt model of morphogenesis. J. Math.
Biol., 6, 317–331.

Harris W.A. (1991). Many cell types speciﬁed by Notch function. Cur-

rent Biol., 1, 120–122.

Heberlein U., M. Mlodzik, and G.M. Rubin.

(1991). Cell-fate deter-
mination in the developing Drosophila eye : role of the rough gene.
Development, 112, 703–712.

Holder N. (1979). Positional information and pattern formation in plant
morphogenesis and a mechanism for the involvement of plant hor-
mones. J. theor. Biol., 77, 195–212.

H¨orstadius S. and A. Wolsky. (1936). Studien ¨uber die Determination
der Bilateralsymmetrie des jungen Seeigelkeimes. Roux’ Arch., 135,
69–113.

Hubel D.H., T.N. Wiesel, and S. LeVay.

(1977). Plasticity of ocular
dominance columns in monkey striate cortex. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B, 278, 377–409.

Ingham P.W. (1991). Segment polarity genes and cell patterning within
the Drosophila body segment. Curr. Opinions Genetics Develop-
ment, 1, 261–267.

Ingham P.W. and Y. Nakano. (1990). Cell patterning and segment po-
larity genes in Drosophila. Development Growth & Differentiation,
32, 563–574.

Izpisuabelmonte J.C., E.M. DeRobertis, K.G. Storey, and C.D. Stern.
(1993). The homeobox gene goosecoid and the origin of organizer
cells in the early chick blastoderm. Cell, 74, 645–659.

Jacobson M. (1991). Developmental neurobiology. Plenum Press, New

York.

Jaffe L.F. (1981). The role of ionic currents in establishing developmen-

tal pattern. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. B, 295, 553–566.

Karpilow J., A. Kolodkin, T. Bork, and T. Venkatesh. (1989). Neuronal
development in the Drosophila compoud eye : rap gene function is
required in photoreceptor cell R8 for ommatidial pattern formation.
Genes & Development, 3, 1834–1844.

de Kepper P., V. Castets, E. Dulos, and J. Boissonade. (1991). Turing-
type chemical patterns in the chloride-iodite-malonic acid reaction.
Physica D, 49, 161–169.

Kimmel B.E., U. Heberlein, and M. Rubin.

(1990). The homeo do-
main protein rough is expressed in a subset of cells in the develop-
ing Drosophila eye where it can specify photoreceptor cell subtype.
Genes & Development, 4, 712–727.

Koch A.J., J. Guerreiro, G.P. Bernasconi, and J. Sadik.

analytic model of phyllotaxis. J. Phys. France, 4, 187–207.

(1994). An

22

K¨uhn A. (1965). Vorlesungen ¨uber Entwicklungsphysiologie. Springer-

Ready D.F. (1989). A multifacetted approach to neural development.

Verlag, Berlin.

Kuziora M.A. and W. McGinnis. (1990). Altering the regulatory targets
of the deformed protein in Drosophila embryos by substituting the
abdominal-b homeodomain. Mechanism Development, 33, 83–94.

Lacalli T.C. (1990). Modeling the Drosophila pair-rule pattern by
reaction-diffusion : Gap input and pattern control in a 4-morphogen
system. J. theor. Biol., 144, 171–194.

Lefever R. (1968). Dissipative structures in chemical systems. J. Chem.

Phys., 49, 4977–4978.

Lewis M.A. and J.D. Murray. (1992). Analysis of dynamic and stationary

pattern formation in the cell cortex. J. Math. Biol., 31, 25–71.

Lyndon R.F. (1990). Plant Development. The Cellular Basis. Unwin

Hyman, London.

Lyons M.J. and L.G. Harrison. (1992). Stripe selection – an intrinsic
property of some pattern-forming models with nonlinear dynamics.
Dev. Dynamics, 195, 201–215.

Macauley-Bode P. and H.R. Bode. (1984). Patterning in hydra. In Pat-
tern Formation, G.M. Malacinski, editor, Macmillan Publishing Com-
pany, London.

Markopoulou K. and S. Artavanis-Tsakonas.

(1991). Developmental
analysis of the facets, a group of intronic mutations at the Notch
locus of Drosophila melanogaster that affect postembryonic devel-
opment. J. Exp. Zool., 257, 314–329.

Marzec C. and J. Kappraff. (1983). Properties of maximal spacing on
a circle related to phyllotaxis and to the golden mean. J. theor. Biol.,
103, 201–226.

Meinhardt H. (1978). Space-dependent cell determination under the

control of a morphogen gradient. J. theor. Biol., 74, 307–321.

Meinhardt H. (1982). Models of biological pattern formation. Academic

Press, London; (freely available at:
www.eb.tuebingen.mpg.de/meinhardt/82-book).

Meinhardt H. (1986). Hierarchical inductions of cell states : a model for

segmentation in Drosophila. J. Cell Sci. Suppl., 4, 357–381.

Meinhardt H. (1991). Determination borders as organizing regions in
the generation of secondary embryonic ﬁelds : the initiation of legs
and wings. Seminars in Devel. Biol., 2, 129–138.

Meinhardt H. (1993). A model for pattern formation of hypostome, ten-
tacles, and foot in Hydra : How to form structures close to each other,
how to form them at a distance. Devel. Biol., 157, 321–333.

Meinhardt H. and A. Gierer. (1980). Generation and regeneration of
sequences of structures during morphogenesis. J. theor. Biol., 85,
429–450.

Meinhardt H. and M. Klinger. (1987). A model for pattern formation on

the shells of molluscs. J. theor. Biol., 126, 63–69.

Mitchison G.J. (1977). Phyllotaxis and the Fibonacci series. Science,

19, 270–275.

Morgan T.H. (1904). An attempt to analyse the phenomena of polarity

in tubularia. J. exp. Zool., 1, 587–591.

M¨uller W.A. (1990).

formation in Hydra :
Diacylglycerol-induced increase of positional values and assistance
of the head in foot formation. Differentiation, 42, 131–143.

Ectopic head and foot

Murray J.D. (1981). On pattern formation mechanisms for lepidopteran
wing patterns and mammalian coat markings. Phil. Trans R. Soc.
Lond. B, 295, 473–496.

Murray J.D. (1981). A pre-pattern formation mechanism for animal coat

markings. J. theor. Biol., 88, 161–199.

Murray J.D. (1988). How the leopard gets its spots. Sci. Am., 258,

80–87.

Murray J.D. (1990). Mathematical Biology. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Murray J.D. and M.R. Myerscough. (1991). Pigmentation pattern for-

mation on snakes. J. theor. Biol., 149, 339–360.

Nicolis G. and I. Prigogine. (1977). Self-organization in Nonequilibrium

Nijhout H.F. (1978). Wing pattern formation in Lepidoptera : a model.

Systems. Wiley, New York.

J. exp. Zool., 206, 119–136.

Nijhout H.F. (1980). Pattern formation in lepidopteran wings : determi-

nation of an eyespot. Devel. Biol., 80, 267–274.

Ouyang Q., J. Boissonade, J.C. Roux, and P. de Kepper. (1989). Sus-
tained reaction-diffusion structures in a open reactor. Phys. Lett. A,
134, 282–286.

23

TINS, 12, 102–110.

Ready D.F., T.E. Hanson, and S. Benzer. (1976). Development of the
Drosophila retina, a neurocrystalline lattice. Devel. Biol., 53, 217–
240.

Richter P.H. and R. Schranner. (1978). Leaf arrangement. geometry,
morphogenesis, and classiﬁcation. Naturwissenschaften, 65, 319–
327.

Rothen F. and A.J. Koch. (1989a). Phyllotaxis, or the properties of spiral
I. Shape invariance under compression. J. Phys. France,

lattices.
50, 633–657.

Rothen F. and A.J. Koch.

(1989b). Phyllotaxis or the properties of
spiral lattices. II. Packing of circles along logarithmic spirals. J. Phys.
France, 50, 1603–1621.

Schoute J.C. (1913). Beitr¨age zur Blattstellung. Rev. trav. bot. Neerl.,

10, 153–325.

Segel L.A. and J.L. Jackson. (1972). Dissipative structure : an expla-

nation and an ecological example. J. theor. Biol., 37, 545–549.

S´eguy E. (197). L’aile des insectes.

In Trait´e de Zoologie, Grass´e P.,

editor, vol.VIII, Masson et Cie, Paris.

Serﬂing E. (1989). Autoregulation, a common property of eucariotic

transcription factors ? Trend Genetics, 5, 131–133.

Shimizu H., Y. Sawada, and T. Sugiyama. (1993). Minimum tissue size

required for hydra regeneration. Devel. Biol., 155, 287–296.

Slack J.M.W. (1987). Morphogenetic gradients — past and present.

TIBS, 12, 200–204.

39, 190–199.

Snow R. (1940). A hormone for correlative inhibition. New Phytologist,

Steindler D.A. and A. Faissner amd M. Schachner. (1989). Brain “cor-
dones”: Transient boundaries of glia and adhesion molecules that
deﬁne developing functional units. Comments Devel. NeuroBiol., 1,
29–60.

Stern C.D. 1(986). Do ionic currents play a role in the control of devel-

opment ? BioEssays, 4, 180–184.

Summerbell D. (1974). Interaction between the proximo-distal and an-
teroposterior co-ordinates of positional value during the speciﬁcation
of positional information in the early development of the chick limb-
bud. J. Embryol. exp. Morph., 32, 227–237.

Sussex I.M. (1955). Morphogenesis in Solanum tuberosum L. : Ex-
perimental investigation of leaf dorsiventrality and orientation in the
juvenile shoot. Phytomorphology, 5, 286–300.

Takano J. and T. Sugiyama. (1983). Genetic analysis of developmental
mechanisms in hydra. VIII. head-activation and head-inhibition po-
tentials of a slow-budding strain (L4). J. Embryol. exp. Morph., 78,
141–168.

Thaller C. and G. Eichele. (1987). Identiﬁcation and spatial distribution
of retinoids in the developing chick limb bud. Nature, 327, 525–629.
(1988). Characterization of retinoid
metabolism in the developing chick limb bud. Development, 103,
473–484.

Thaller C. and G. Eichele.

Thornley J.H.M. (1975). Phyllotaxis. I. A mechanistic model. Ann. bot.

Fenn., 39, 491–507.

Tickle C. (1981). The number of polarizing region cells required to
specify additional digits in the developing chick wing. Nature, 289,
295–298.

Tomlinson A. (1988). Cellular interactions in the developing Drosophila

eye. Development, 104, 183–193.

Tomlinson A., B.E. Kimmel, and G.M. Rubin.

rough, a
Drosophila homeobox gene required in photoreceptors R2 and R5
for inductive interactions in the developing eye. Cell, 55, 771–784.

(1988).

Turing A.M. (1952). The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Phil. Trans.

Roy. Soc. B, 237, 37–72.

Vardasca J., A. de Wit, G. Dewel, and P. Borckmans. (1992). Reentrant

hexagonal Turing structures. Phys. Lett. A, 168, 194–198.

White R.H. (1961). Analysis of the development of the compound eye

in the mosquito, Aedes aegypti. J. exp. Zool., 148, 223–237.

Wigglesworth V.B. (1940). Local and general factors in the develop-
ment of pattern in Rhodnius prolixus (hemiptera). J. exp. Biol., 17,
180–200.

Wilby O.K. and G. Webster.

(1970). Experimental studies on axial

polarity in hydra. J. Embryol. exp. Morphol., 24, 595–613.

Wolpert L. (1969). Positionnal information and the spatial pattern of

cellular differentiation. J. theor. Biol., 25, 1–47.

Wolpert L., J. Hicklin, and A. Hornbruch. (1971). Positional information
and pattern regulation in regeneration of hydra. Symp. Soc. exp.
Biol., 25, 391–415.

Wolpert L. and A. Hornbruch. (1981). Positionnal signalling along the
anteroposterior axis of the chick wing. The effect of multiple polariz-
ing region grafts. J. Embryol. exp. Morph., 63, 145–159.

Yotsumoto A. (1993). A diffusion model for phyllotaxis. J. theor. Biol.,

162, 131–151.

Zobel A.M. (1989a). Origins of nodes and internodes in plant shoots.
I. Transverse zonation of apical parts of the shoot. Ann. Bot., 63,
201–208.

24

