Experimental Psychology Lab WS 2014/15 

nknodel 

 

 

PORTFOLIO 

 

Howitt & Cramer (2011). Introduction to research methods in psychology. (3rd edition). New  

York: Prentice Hall. 

Chapter 3 p. 40-54: Variables, concepts and measures 

 
3.2 

 
3.3 

 
3.4 

 
3.5 

 The history of the variable in psychology 

  Term has its origin in statistics (introduced by the man who originated the correlation 

coefficient) 

  First extensive use of (in-)dependent and intervening variables in 1930s 
  Our measures are a limited sample of possible measures of whatever it is we are interested 

in theoretically 

  We need to explore more deeply the definition of the concept at the theoretical level. 

Types of variables 

  2 types of meanings: primarily of theoretical and conceptual interest or primarily statistical in 

nature. 

  Variables do not readily fall into one category. Sometimes psychologists have taken statistical 

terminology and absorbed it into their professional vocabulary to refer to slightly different 
things.  

Independent and dependent variables 

  Consider true-experiment: manipulated variable = independent variable 
  Measured variable = dependent variable 
  The dependent variable is subject to the influence of the independent variable. The 
independent variable is the manipulated variable and the dependent variable is the 
measured value which is expected to be influenced by the manipulated variables.  

  Not so clear in non-experimental designs 
  Characteristic s of the participant are called subject variables 

Measurement characteristics of variables 

  Measurement is the process of assigning individuals to the categories or values of a variable. 
Different variables have different measurement characteristics which need to be understood 
in order to plan and execute research effectively. 

  Distinction: nominal vs quantitative measurements 

  Nominal variables 

o  Two or more named categories 
o  No mathematical properties 
o  Dichotomous, binominal, binary variables (2 different values) 
o  Multinominal variables ( 

  Quantitative variables 

o  The numbers (scores) or values we assign to each person or case represent increasing 

levels of the variable. 

o  Mathematical/arithmetic operations: average value, sum values,… 
o  Mediator variable: responsible for the relationship between independent and 

dependent variables 

o  Moderator variables: show that the relationship between an independent variable 

and a dependent variable is not consistent throughout the data 

 
3.6 

Stevens’ theory of scales of measurement 

  Theory of scales of measurement put forward by Stevens in 1946 
  He is the originator of the idea of nominal, ordinal, interval and ratio scales 
  Different in terms of how the measurement would be carried out, different mathematical 

properties 
Least powerful – most powerful (more information) 

 
  Ratio measurement scale 

o  Requirement of intervals, requirement of zero point 

 

Interval measurement scale 

o  Requirement of intervals, real numbers, based on equal steps 

  Ordinal measurement scale 

o  Relative order on some sort if characteristic, rank order, not appropriate for e.g. 

mean 

  Nominal (or category/categorical) measurement scales 

o  Give labels, numbers can be confusing 

  Problem: we don’t know that each mathematical unit is the same as each psychological unit 

 

 

Self-study 

1.  Create  a  folder  structure  for  the  git-tracked  seminar  project  folder;  put  in  first  files  and  save 

stage (commit). Write down folder structure.  

 
mkdir ExpPsyLab 
cd ExpPsyLab/ 
git init 
c:/Users/Nicole/ExpPsyLab/.git/ 
touch Portfolio.txt 
git commit –m“Save my changes“ 
 
 

2.  Try to clone a public project from the GitHub (www.github.com) website (not in project folder).  

 
git clone [url] [directory] 
 

3. 

Import 10 references related to your topic of interest into Mendeley.  

done 
 

4.  Create  a  folder  in  Mendeley  to  collect  your  seminar  papers.  Create  a  second  folder  to  collect 

papers for your group research topic. Fill both folders with some papers.  

done 
 

5.  Take one of your proposed research questions from the last assignment and think about how you 

could practically investigate the issue. Summarize in a short paragraph 

 
“What causes eating disorders?  And why are mostly young women affected by eating 
disorders?” 
 
Define  and  explain  eating  disorders.  Narrow  down  the  topic.  Maybe  limit  the  topic  of 
interest/research  topic  to a  specific  disorder.  Try  to formulate  a  hypothesis  about  possible 
disorder causing factors. Investigate the causes from literature and check if this matches your 
expectations.  If  necessary,  come  up  with  a  study.  Plan  the  kind  of  study  and  its  design. 
Formulate  variables  (we  want  to  know  if  there  might  be  a  causal  relationship  between 
particular  variables  or  which  ones  might  influence/moderate/mediate  others).  Since  there 
might be a lot of factors influencing the individual a survey might be the best option to get an 
overall picture. After we got information about what the root of this disorder might be, we 
can investigate biological/neurological factors that play a role. 
Do  more  literature  search  and  explain  why  there  is  a  tendency  of  more  women  being 
affected. Give an account of the differences between males and females that play a role in 
this regard. This is another hypothesis. Also give evidence if this is not true. 

