NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

NeuroImage

j ou r n a l h o m e p a ge : w ww . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l oc a te / yn i mg

Effective connectivity within the frontoparietal control network
differentiates cognitive control and working memory
Ian H. Harding a,b,⁎, Murat Yücel b, Ben J. Harrison a, Christos Pantelis a, Michael Breakspear c,d
a Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne & Melbourne Health, Melbourne, Australia
b Monash Clinical and Imaging Neuroscience, School of Psychological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
c QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
d Metro North Mental Health Service, Brisbane, QLD, Australia

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 18 November 2014
Available online 22 November 2014

Keywords:
Cognitive control
Working memory
Dynamic causal modeling
Frontoparietal
Effective connectivity

Cognitive control and working memory rely upon a common fronto-parietal network that includes the inferior
frontal junction (IFJ), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), pre-supplementary motor area/dorsal anterior cin-
gulate cortex (pSMA/dACC), and intraparietal sulcus (IPS). This network is able to ﬂexibly adapt its function in
response to changing behavioral goals, mediating a wide range of cognitive demands. Here we apply dynamic
causal modeling to functional magnetic resonance imaging data to characterize task-related alterations in the
strength of network interactions across distinct cognitive processes. Evidence in favor of task-related connectivity
dynamics was accrued across a very large space of possible network structures. Cognitive control and working
memory demands were manipulated using a factorial combination of the multi-source interference task and a
verbal 2-back working memory task, respectively. Both were found to alter the sensitivity of the IFJ to perceptual
information, and to increase IFJ-to-pSMA/dACC connectivity. In contrast, increased connectivity from the pSMA/
dACC to the IPS, as well as from the dlPFC to the IFJ, was uniquely driven by cognitive control demands; a task-
induced negative inﬂuence of the dlPFC on the pSMA/dACC was speciﬁc to working memory demands. These re-
sults reﬂect a system of both shared and unique context-dependent dynamics within the fronto-parietal net-
work. Mechanisms supporting cognitive engagement, response selection, and action evaluation may be shared
across cognitive domains, while dynamic updating of task and context representations within this network are
potentially speciﬁc to changing demands on cognitive control.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction

Cognitive control (CC) and working memory (WM) rely on neural
processing within a common set of brain regions encompassing
dorsomedial prefrontal, lateral prefrontal, and superior parietal regions
of the human cortex (Fedorenko et al., 2013; Harding et al., in press;
Niendam et al., 2012). This so-called “frontoparietal network” (FPN)
represents a ﬂexible, superordinate system supporting adaptive behav-
ioral control across a broad range of cognitive demands (Cocchi et al.,
2013; Cole et al., 2013; Dosenbach et al., 2008). The inherent ﬂexibility
of this system has been linked to rapid adjustments in neuronal re-
sponse proﬁles as a function of changing behavioral goals or contextual
cues (Kadohisa et al., 2013; Stokes et al., 2013). However, the neural
mechanisms underlying such dynamic representation of unique behav-
ioral goals and encoding of diverse contextual information remain
unclear.

⁎ Corresponding author at: School of Psychological Sciences, Building 17, Clayton

Campus, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia. Fax: +61 3 9348 0469.

E-mail address: ian.harding@monash.edu (I.H. Harding).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.039
1053-8119/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Functional neuroimaging research has established that activity in
the regions forming the FPN demonstrate temporal coherence
(i.e., functional connectivity) in human subjects at rest (Cole and
Schneider, 2007; Power et al., 2011). The magnitude of these intrinsic
inter-regional interactions has additionally been shown to selectively
change in response to behavioral demands, as demonstrated most clear-
ly in studies exploring the dynamic interplay between the dorsomedial
and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices during cognitive control tasks
(Carter and van Veen, 2007; Prado et al., 2011; Stephan et al., 2003).

More recently, research has moved beyond the study of FPN
connectivity using pair-wise correlations in brain signals, employing tech-
niques that are sensitive to network-wide and directional interdepen-
dencies (i.e., effective connectivity; Friston, 2011). Dynamic causal
modeling (DCM) provides one means to infer neural interactions and
their task-dependent changes within a brain network (Friston et al.,
2003). In contrast to alternative effective connectivity modeling ap-
proaches (e.g., Structural Equation Modeling), DCM models dynamics at
the level of neuronal populations, as opposed to the measured hemody-
namics, providing greater construct validity to derived models of network
function (Daunizeau et al., 2011). Moreover, DCM does not depend on the
temporal precedence of one regional time series relative to another (as in

I.H. Harding et al. / NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

145

multivariate autoregressive models); reliance on temporal lag may be
problematic to inference using fMRI data (Friston et al., 2013).

Studies employing DCM to explore the FPN have identiﬁed sparse
task-related connectivity dynamics on top of a foundation of widespread
task-invariant “baseline” interactions, largely mirroring correlation-
based work (Cieslik et al., 2011; Fan et al., 2008; Schlosser et al., 2008;
Wang et al., 2010). In particular, Schlosser et al. (2010) report modula-
tions of medial–lateral prefrontal interactions during performance of a
Stroop task, while WM load has been associated with the transient gat-
ing of, primarily, fronto-parietal connectivity (Deserno et al., 2012; Dima
et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2012; Schmidt et al., 2014). These ﬁndings point to
a well-integrated network whose interactions are selectively weighted
in response to current behavioral demands, reﬂecting a potential mech-
anism of adaptive coding within the FPN (Duncan, 2001). However, dis-
similar experimental protocols and deﬁnitions of the FPN across
available investigations preclude a more uniﬁed account of the response
of this network across different cognitive domains.

Here we utilize DCM to investigate task-related changes in the FPN
as CC and WM demands are systematically co-varied within a single
fMRI task. Task-related dynamics of the interactions between the visual
system and the FPN are ﬁrst explored to assess the shared versus unique
mechanisms underlying the selective engagement of higher-order cog-
nitive processes. Context-dependent plasticity between the major re-
gions of the FPN as a function of CC or WM demands is then assessed
to distinguish their relative contributions to underlying connectivity
dynamics.

Materials & methods

Participants

Twenty-ﬁve right-handed healthy adults (14 males; mean age ±
s.d. = 25.5 ± 4.4 years) with no history of psychiatric or neurologic ill-
ness were recruited from the general community through advertise-
ments in local electronic media. Exclusion criteria included a history
of psychiatric or neurologic illness, substance dependence, signiﬁcant
head injury, current use of psychotropic medications, or MRI incompat-
ibility (e.g., cardiac pace-maker), as assessed using the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis-I Disorders (First et al., 2002) and
self-report. Participants had completed an average of 14.8 ± 2.2 years
of education and had a mean estimated full-scale IQ of 110 ± 10
(Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence; Wechsler, 1999). This par-
ticipant sample is the same as that reported in Harding et al. (in press).
The local research and ethics committee approved study conduct and all
participants provided written informed consent.

Behavioral paradigm

CC and WM demands were respectively manipulated using the
multi-source interference task (MSIT; Bush and Shin, 2006) and a verbal
n-back working memory task (n = 0, 1, or 2; Baddeley, 2003), com-
bined in a 2 × 3 factorial design. This design allowed for orthogonal ma-
nipulation of CC and WM demands within a common task context. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, and described in full detail elsewhere (Harding
et al., in press), participants were presented with sets of three numbers
ranging in value from ‘0’ to ‘3’, with one number distinct to the other
two (e.g., ‘2 1 1’), and instructed to identify the distinct number by but-
ton press (‘1’ = index; ‘2’ = middle; ‘3’ = ring ﬁngers). CC demands
were manipulated by altering the composition of the number-sets:
“congruent” trials featured the distinct number paired with zeros,
which do not represent a response alternative, and spatially aligned
with the corresponding response ﬁnger; conversely, “incongruent” tri-
als featured both ‘Flanker’ interference introduced by distracter num-
bers (Eriksen and Eriksen, 1974) and ‘Simon’ conﬂict based on spatial
incongruence between the target digit and the corresponding response
ﬁnger (Simon and Berbaum, 1990). Working memory demands were

introduced by requiring participants to withhold a response if the cur-
rent ‘distinct’ number was the same as that presented ‘n’ trials previous-
ly (where n represents the working memory load: 1 or 2). Two trials in
which this condition was met were included in each working memory
block.

The six conditions were presented in alternating blocks containing 8,
9, or 10 stimuli for 0-Back, 1-Back, and 2-Back blocks, respectively. The
ﬁrst stimulus in 1-Back blocks, and ﬁrst two in 2-Back blocks were
discarded during analysis to account for ‘ramping-up’ of WM load.
Each stimulus was presented for 2 s and separated by variable inter-
stimulus intervals of between 3.6 s and 7.2 s. Four blocks of each condi-
tion were presented across the experiment, each preceded by an
instruction screen indicating the n of the subsequent block.

fMRI data acquisition

Images were obtained on a 3-Tesla Siemens Trio scanner equipped
with a 32-channel head coil. Each functional run consisted of 354
whole-brain gradient-echo echo-planar (GRE-EPI) images composed
of 36 interleaved, contiguous axial slices (TR = 2400 ms; TE = 32 ms;
ﬂip angle = 90°; slice thickness = 3 mm; in-plane resolution
(matrix) = 3.3 × 3.3 mm (64 × 64); FOV = 210 × 210 mm). A high-
resolution T1-weighted MPRAGE structural image was also acquired
(176 sagittal slices; 0.9 mm isotropic voxels; TR = 1900 ms; TE =
2.24 ms; FOV = 230 × 230 mm; matrix = 256 × 256).

fMRI data analysis

Analysis was performed using SPM8 software (Functional Imaging
Laboratory, UCL, UK). Structural (T1-weighted) images from each indi-
vidual were ﬁrst coregistered to the functional data and normalized to
standard space (DARTEL; Ashburner, 2007). The estimated nonlinear
transformation parameters were subsequently applied to the (rigid-
body) motion-corrected functional data. The normalized data were in-
terpolated to 2 mm isotropic voxels and spatially smoothed using a
Gaussian kernel of 8 mm FWHM.

For each individual, the six task conditions were coded as individual
predictors in a general linear model, alongside nuisance regressors ac-
counting for error trials, instruction periods, and working memory
ramping effects (i.e., ﬁrst trial in 1-back blocks and ﬁrst two trials in 2-
back blocks). Each stimulus event was coded as a delta (i.e., stick) func-
tion and convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function.
Data were high-pass ﬁltered (1/128 s), and temporal autocorrelations
were estimated using a ﬁrst-order autoregression model [AR(1)]. Pa-
rameters corresponding to each predictor were estimated using a re-
stricted maximum likelihood approach. Contrast images were created
among the six conditions of interest to infer the main positive effects
of CC and WM (voxel-level family-wise error corrected p b0.05) within
a repeated-measures ANOVA framework.

Dynamic causal modeling

Deterministic, bilinear dynamic causal models (Friston et al., 2003)
were used to assess large-scale neural interdependencies within the
FPN using differential state equations comprised of three sets/matrices
of parameters: A, context-invariant intrinsic inﬂuences between
regions; B, context-dependent modulations of the intrinsic connections
as a function of CC and WM demands; and C, exogenous visual inputs.
Models of neuronal dynamics were combined with a hemodynamic
model that describes the relationship between the (hidden) neuronal
activity of the system and the measured fMRI signal (Friston et al.,
2000). The parameters of the integrated model were estimated using
a Bayesian inversion algorithm (Friston et al., 2003), as implemented
in the DCM10 toolbox (Functional Imaging Laboratory, UCL, UK).

We tested a broad variety of models (see below). Estimates of the
posterior evidence of these models were derived during Bayesian

146

I.H. Harding et al. / NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

Fig. 1. Experimental design. A, 2 × 3 factorial structure of the cognitive paradigm with examples of visual stimuli corresponding to low-demand (congruent) and high-demand (incongru-
ent) cognitive control presented at the top. Given a sequential presentation, the appropriate response option to each stimulus is indicated for the three levels of working memory demand.
B, Example timecourse of experimental presentation, including rest periods (gray ﬁxation) followed by an instruction screen and stimulus presentation with jittered interstimulus interval.
Figure replicated from Harding et al. (in press).

inversion (Friston et al., 2007). Utilizing these estimates, group-level
random-effects Bayesian Model Selection (rfx-BMS) was employed to
infer the relative likelihood that a model, or family of models sharing a
common characteristic, best represented the neural system at the pop-
ulation level (Penny et al., 2010; Stephan et al., 2009).

Network analysis overview

The overarching objective of this study was to disentangle the rela-
tive impact of WM and CC on interactions between a closely associated
set of cortical brain regions that are collectively responsive to a broad
range of higher-order cognitive manipulations (Cole and Schneider,
2007; Fedorenko et al., 2013; Niendam et al., 2012). These brain regions,
representing the FPN, include the: (i) inferior frontal junction (IFJ),
within the posterolateral prefrontal cortex; (ii) mid-dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex (dlPFC); (iii) dorsomedial prefrontal cortex bridging the
pre-supplementary motor area and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
(pSMA/dACC); and (iv) intraparietal sulcus (IPS) within the superior
parietal cortex.

The number of ROIs included in network analyses was constrained
by computational feasibility imposed by the extensive connectivity
modeling approach employed (see below). Analyses were therefore re-
stricted to a left-lateralized network, based on the relative weighting of
task effects and greater consistency of individual-level activations with-
in this hemisphere. In fact, individual-level activations in the right dlPFC
and IFJ could not be reliably discriminated in all participants. Addition-
ally, available evidence supports a left-lateralization of brain connectiv-
ity dynamics underlying language-based (versus spatial) cognitive tasks
(Stephan et al., 2003).

Inference on network dynamics proceeded in a hierarchical fashion:
First, the four regions forming the FPN (IFJ, dlPFC, pSMA/dACC, and IPS),
as well as visual-perceptual areas, were identiﬁed in each individual.
Second, inference was undertaken on task-dependent changes in
bottom-up connectivity between the visual perceptual system and the
cognitive FPN (i.e., perception–cognition interactions). Finally, task-
dependent changes within the FPN were assessed. For computational
feasibility, this step was initially undertaken on connections linking
the IFJ, pSMA/dACC, and IPS; dlPFC interactions were then inferred.

This inference procedure corresponds to a greedy search of model
space, similar to that applied in other DCM protocols, e.g., (Schlosser
et al., 2010; Vossel et al., 2012). A greedy heuristic serves to approxi-
mate a global optimum solution by iteratively identifying local optima
to subsets of the problem; each iteration builds on the previous step
in a hierarchical fashion (Black, 2005). The greedy search employed
here provides an approximation of optimal model structure while
affording computational feasibility.

Region-of-interest (ROI) selection

The four ROIs forming the FPN (IFJ, dlPFC, pSMA/dACC, and IPS)
were identiﬁed on the basis of the intersection (i.e., null conjunction)
of the positive main effects of CC and WM (voxel-level FWE-corrected
p b 0.05). In addition, a one-way ANOVA across all task conditions
was used to localize peak activations related to perceptual processing
in the visual cortex (V). Group activation foci served as a starting
point to uniquely identify ROIs in each individual. For each individual,
the global conjunction of the main CC and main WM effects was ﬁrst
calculated, and the peak-voxel nearest to the group-maximum of each
ROI was identiﬁed. The ﬁrst eigenvariate of the fMRI time-series was ex-
tracted from all voxels exceeding the uncorrected signiﬁcance thresh-
old of p b 0.05 within a 4 mm radius of the peak-voxel within each
region. The timeseries were mean-centered and known variance of
non-interest removed (e.g., task instruction periods; error trials).

Perception–cognition interactions: model speciﬁcation and bayesian
model selection

In this experiment, the FPN was differentially responsive to the
presentation of the same visual stimulus as a function of changing CC
and WM demands. It stands to reason that the inﬂuence of perceptual
processes on at least one region of the FPN must therefore change in re-
sponse to shifting cognitive demands, providing a mechanism for selec-
tive and ﬂexible engagement of higher-order cognitive processes. In
other words, the bottom-up connectivity between the visual system
and the FPN must be sensitive to cognitive demand. However, cognitive
engagement has been localized to each of the four regions of the FPN
considered herein in previous works (c.f., Banich, 2009; Brass et al.,
2005a; Carter and van Veen, 2007; Kravitz et al., 2011). We disambigu-
ate this issue through the use of a model comparison approach.

First, we speciﬁed a model architecture in which stimulus presenta-
tion (i.e., the driving input, ‘C’) elicited activity in the visual cortex. The
driving input was not mean-centered in this study. Perceptual informa-
tion subsequently propagated to each node of the FPN (i.e., through the
unidirectional A matrix connectivity). Reciprocal interactions were in-
cluded between the four regions of the FPN (i.e., a fully connected sub-
graph of the A matrix between these nodes; c.f. Fig. 3). This architecture
was then modulated to variously model the inﬂuence of CC and WM de-
mands on the magnitude of the bottom-up interactions between the
perceptual system and the nodes of the FPN (i.e., the B matrix). Modula-
tory inputs were modeled as orthogonal main effects of CC or WM
(i.e., Incongruent N Congruent; 2-Back N 0-Back). Speciﬁcation of all pos-
sible combinations of CC and/or WM acting to modulate any or all of
these connections resulted in 256 model architectures, which were

I.H. Harding et al. / NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

147

subsequently estimated for each participant. As signiﬁcant WM × CC in-
teraction effects were not evident in FPN fMRI activations (Harding
et al., in press), interaction-related connectivity dynamics were not
considered.

Family rfx-BMS analysis was performed to infer the most likely
model structure at each of the four bottom-up connections (Penny
et al., 2010). Each of the 256 models was assigned to one of four ‘fami-
lies’ based on the task effects at, for example, the V → IFJ interaction:
i) no modulation, ii) CC only, iii) WM only, or iv) both CC and WM.
Each family contained 64 models. As each family collectively differed
only in the task-sensitivity of this one connection, pooled evidence in
favor of the different modulatory conﬁgurations could be robustly esti-
mated while integrating over the effect of all other parameters in the
models (Penny et al., 2010). The optimal model structure was inferred
based on estimated exceedance probabilities (xp), which represent the
likelihood that each family had superior evidence to all others
(Stephan et al., 2009). This process was replicated across each of the
four bottom-up connections.

FPN connectivity: model speciﬁcation and Bayesian model selection

The FPN is thought to adaptively encode representations of both CC
and WM (Duncan, 2001; Harding et al., in press). However, in order for a
common neuronal substrate to ﬂexibly encapsulate diverse informa-
tion, the system must be differentially tuned across changing contexts
or goals. Differential interactions within this network may provide one
mechanism underlying such context-speciﬁc encoding. To comprehen-
sively test this idea, context-sensitive changes within the FPN were in-
ferred in a comparable manner to perception–cognition interactions
(above).

Due to computational demands, connectivity between the four net-
work nodes (necessitating estimation of 412 [N16 million] models)
could not be considered in one step. On the basis of current theory,
which highlights the importance of medial–lateral PFC dynamics to CC
(e.g., Schlosser et al., 2010), and fronto-parietal dynamics to WM
(e.g., Deserno et al., 2012), interactions between one node of the lateral
PFC, the pSMA/dACC, and the IPS were ﬁrst assessed. As the principle
site of FPN engagement (see below), inclusion of the IFJ (as opposed
to the dlPFC) was investigated in the ﬁrst instance.

All possible combinations of CC and WM acting at each of the six re-
ciprocal interactions between the IFJ, pSMA/dACC, and IPS were ﬁrst de-
ﬁned, resulting in 4096 model architectures, and estimated for each
individual. For each of the six connections, the 4096 models were evenly
partitioned into the same four families as above (no modulation, CC
only, WM only, both CC and WM) and rfx-BMS inference was undertak-
en. This procedure was then repeated for the six reciprocal interactions
between the dlPFC and the other three nodes, requiring speciﬁcation
and estimation of a further 4096 models per subject.

The estimation of a large, comprehensive model space eschews spe-
ciﬁc assumptions regarding model structure, and eliminates reliance on
a single architecture for inference of neural dynamics, providing for
more robust assessment of network characteristics (Penny et al.,
2010). This procedure is particularly useful in the present setting
where prior evidence provides little deﬁnitive guidance to specifying
particular models due to a lack of clear consensus opinion,
e.g., (Banich, 2009; Carter and van Veen, 2007).

FPN connectivity: Bayesian Model Averaging

Following speciﬁcation of a likely modulatory structure at each of
the 12 connections within the FPN, quantiﬁcation and inference on
the parameter magnitudes was undertaken. Using a random-effects
Bayesian Model Averaging approach, the posterior distributions of the
parameter magnitudes at each connection across all participants and
all models within the most likely model-family were estimated, with
the contribution of each model weighted by its relative model evidence

(Penny et al., 2010). The probability that the parameter magnitude dif-
fered from zero was assessed based on the proportion of the posterior
distribution that lay above (or below) zero. A 95% posterior probability
threshold was employed for reporting signiﬁcance. This approach is
roughly analogous to a one-tailed frequentist threshold of p b0.05, in
which the reported p-value is based on the proportion of the normal
distribution that is more extreme than the estimated parameter. In
both cases, probability is based on the size of the ‘tail’ of the distribution
(e.g., Fig. 7B and 9B in Stephan et al., 2008). Using a Bayesian approach,
inference is conditional on the estimated distribution of the actual data
(which is approximately normally distributed), as opposed to a pro-
posed ‘null’ distribution centered around zero. While the theoretical
conceptualizations underlying the two approaches are distinct, they
will yield roughly the same outcome in this instance, with distinctions
primarily driven by deviations from exact normality in the data.

Results

Task-related fMRI activations and behavior

The null conjunction of the group-level main CC and main WM ef-
fects identiﬁed robust (FWE-corrected, voxel-level p b0.05), spatially-
coincident activations in each of the four ROIs selected to represent
the left FPN (Fig. 2): IFJ (group MNI coordinates: x, y, z = −42, 4, 28);
dlPFC (−38, 30, 18); pSMA/dACC (0, 16, 46); and IPS (−30, −54,
48); see Harding et al. (in press) for full, whole-brain results. No interac-
tion effects between the two cognitive contexts were in evidence. The
one-way ANOVA across all conditions additionally identiﬁed wide-
spread activity in the visual cortex, centered (in the left-hemisphere)
at MNI coordinates x, y, z = −26, −90, −2.

Similarly, a repeated-measures ANOVA of reaction times revealed
signiﬁcant main effects of both CC (F1,24 = 194.5, p b 0.001) and WM
(F2,48 = 120.9, p b 0.001), but failed to support the presence of an in-
teraction between the two (F(2,48) = 1.51, p = 0.23). Comparable re-
sults were apparent with respect to error rates: both CC (Z = −2.24,
p = 0.03) and WM (Z = −3.93, p b 0.001) elicited signiﬁcant main
effects, but no signiﬁcant interaction was evident (Z = − 0.75, p =
0.45). See Harding et al. (in press) for full behavioral results.

Perception–cognition interactions

The investigation of interactions between the visual cortex and FPN
using family rfx-BMS indicated that both CC and WM likely modulated
the inﬂuence of perceptual activity on the IFJ (xp = 0.72). The effective
connections from the visual cortex to the other three nodes of the FPN
remained context-insensitive (xp N 0.93; Fig. 3).

It is important to note that, as a random-effects analysis, this result
represents a weighted effect across models and participants. As such,

Fig. 2. Task-related regions-of-interest. The group-level null conjunction of the main posi-
tive cognitive control and working memory fMRI effects (FWE-corrected p b 0.05) high-
lights spatially coincident neural activations. Regions representing the frontoparietal
control network are indicated.

148

I.H. Harding et al. / NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

Table 1
Top 10 (of 256) perception–cognition interaction models.

Rank

Modulation of visual cortex to:

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

SMA

WM

CC, WM

WM

IFJ

CC, WM

CC, WM
CC
CC

dlPFC

IPS

WM
CC
CC, WM

CC, WM

CC

WM

xp

0.079
0.054
0.031
0.019
0.016
0.015
0.015
0.010
0.009
0.007

CC = cognitive control; WM = working memory; xp = exceedance probability.

provided corroborating evidence that the IFJ was indeed the most likely
site of initial network engagement (xp = 0.49; Table 2).

FPN connectivity: model selection

Estimated exceedance probabilities at each of the 12 interactions
within the FPN provided clear evidence in favor of one likely model
structure at all connections, with the exception of the inﬂuence of the
pSMA/dACC on the IPS (Fig. 4). A further analysis was therefore per-
formed to disambiguate the result at this connection, as follows: As op-
posed to dividing the model space into four equal families (see above),
which allows for simultaneous inference on CC and WM, the inﬂuence
of the two contexts were instead tested independently by dividing the
full model space of 4096 structures into two families: i) modulation
by CC at this connection, ii) no modulation by CC. This process was
then repeated for WM. Evidence from all models in which CC acted to
modulate this connection was found to be superior to those where it
did not (xp = 0.76), while the opposite was true of WM (xp = 0.07).
As such, the marginally winning family in the 4-partition analysis (mod-
ulated by CC only) was corroborated.

In summary, as depicted in Fig. 4, both CC and WM were found to
likely modulate the inﬂuence of the IFJ and the IPS on the pSMA/dACC.
Changes in effective connectivity were more extensive for CC than for
WM. CC-unique modulations included outgoing connectivity from the
pSMA/dACC to the IFJ and the IPS, as well as the inputs into the IFJ
from the IPS and dlPFC. Modulations speciﬁc to WM were limited to
the inﬂuence of the dlPFC on the pSMA/dACC. Interestingly, while

Table 2
Driving inputs into the frontoparietal network.

Rank

Driving inputs

SMA

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

X

X

X
X
X

X
X
X

IFJ

X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X

dlPFC

IPS

X

X

X

X

X
X
X
X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

xp

0.494
0.302
0.096
0.035
0.028
0.012
0.011
0.005
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.002
0.002
0.001
0.001

‘X’ indicates the inclusion of a driving input into the indicated region; xp = exceedance
probability.

Fig. 3. Perception–cognition interactions. The most probable network structure governing
the inﬂuence of the visual cortex on the frontoparietal network (FPN) is depicted (top)
based on family Bayesian Model Selection (bottom; xp = exceedance probability). All pos-
sible conﬁgurations of cognitive control (CC) and working memory (WM) acting on bot-
tom-up inﬂuences (blue/green arrows) were compared. At this stage, interactions
within the FPN (gray arrows) are held constant. V = visual cortex; dlPFC = dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex; IFJ = inferior frontal cortex; pSMA/dACC = pre-supplementary motor
area/dorsal anterior cingulate cortex; IPS = intraparietal sulcus.

more subtle effects speciﬁc to individual models or participants may be
integrated out of consideration. This result was therefore further inves-
tigated by contrasting evidence in favor of each of the 256 individual
models; that is, instead of pooling evidence across a number of models
that share a common feature, all models were individually compared
against all others. The single model in which CC and WM acted to mod-
ulate the interaction between the visual cortex and the IFJ was also
found to have the greatest likelihood (Table 1). However, several
other models also had appreciable relative model evidence. Therefore,
while there is robust and reliable evidence in favor of the IFJ as a candi-
date site of FPN engagement, this analysis cannot rule out the additional,
more circumscribed involvement of other network nodes in mediating
perception–cognition interactions.

To simplify models used to study contextual effects within the FPN
and to reduce computational burden, the visual cortex was removed
in subsequent steps and the exogenous driving input mapped directly
onto the IFJ (c.f., Stephan et al., 2010). For validation, the 15 possible
driving input conﬁgurations by which a single input vector could act
at any of the four FPN regions (i.e., all combinations, with the exception
of no input) were speciﬁed and estimated for each participant. BMS

I.H. Harding et al. / NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

149

Fig. 4. Bayesian model selection: frontoparietal dynamics. The most probable network structure governing task-related modulation of interactions within the frontoparietal network (right),
based on family Bayesian Model Selection (left; xp = exceedance probability). All possible conﬁgurations of cognitive control (CC) and working memory (WM) acting on each connection
were compared. Model selection was performed independently at each connection to derive a composite model. dlPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; IFJ = inferior frontal cortex;
pSMA/dACC = pre-supplementary motor area/dorsal anterior cingulate cortex; IPS = intraparietal sulcus.

both contexts altered the sensitivity of the pSMA/dACC to nearly all in-
puts in this region, CC alone elicited the same effect at the IFJ. With the
exception of the inﬂuence of the pSMA/dACC on the IPS, the strength of
all inputs into the dlPFC and IPS were task-independent.

The process of interrogating the network through independent infer-
ence at each connection was supplemented by comparing model evi-
dence across the 4096 individual model structures (at both the 1st and
2nd steps of the heuristic). The estimated exceedance probabilities
assigned to any individual model were negligible in most cases, with
even the top-ranked models reaching a probability of less than 0.003 of
optimally representing the data, as compared to all other models. This
ﬁnding is expected, given the diffusion of model-probability across the
very large model space (i.e., chance probability = 1/4096 = 0.00024)
and is one of the major factors motivating the use of family-level infer-
ence (Penny et al., 2010; Stephan et al., 2010). However, there are still
a small number of models for which the evidence in their favor is appre-
ciably larger than the vast majority of other structures. Although these
models cannot be reliably discriminated based on their estimated ex-
ceedance probabilities alone, the composite models inferred based on
family-level model comparison were found to conform to individual
models found in the top 5 (of 4096) when evidence-ranked in their
own right.

While the family-level inference approach allowed for robust com-
parison of CC and WM effects at each connection, this approach is insen-
sitive to potential
interactions between modulations across the
network. As such, while the composite model (Fig. 4) represents valid
outcomes for each connection independently, it may not fully encapsu-
late the nature of the network as an integrated system. Conversely, al-
though model-level comparison considers the properties of the full
network, deﬁnitive inference is not possible due to the dispersion of in-
dividual model evidences across the model space, as described above.
We therefore also undertook an intermediate approach whereby the
input/output structure of each region was assessed, and inference was
performed separately for each of CC and WM (Supplementary Informa-
tion). These analyses largely corroborated the structure of the composite
network, suggesting that the impact of context on each connection
largely outweighs the inﬂuence of any interactions among the modula-
tory parameters (Figure S1). However, inconsistencies between family-
level and region-level analyses on IFJ-IPS modulation by CC do point to
important interdependencies that may be evident along this axis. Dis-
ambiguation may require network description below the scale of
family-level inference.

FPN connectivity: parameter inference

BMA across the models within the family having the highest like-
lihood at each connection revealed that the magnitude of the task-
independent (i.e., “baseline”; A matrix) efferents from the IFJ and
pSMA/dACC were signiﬁcantly positive in all cases (Fig. 5; Table 3).
The inﬂuence of the dlPFC on the IFJ was also positive, while a nega-
tive inﬂuence of the dlPFC was found to act on the IPS, although this
latter ﬁnding was the weakest in magnitude by an appreciable mar-
gin. Notably, all efferents from the IPS failed to reach signiﬁcance
threshold, suggesting a largely anterior-to-posterior ﬂow of infor-
mation, while bi-directional interactions between frontal regions
were nearly ubiquitous.

With respect to task-dependent dynamics (i.e., B matrix), both CC and
WM demands were found to further increase the facilitatory inﬂuence of
the IFJ on the pSMA/dACC and to introduce a negative inﬂuence of the IPS
on the pSMA/dACC (Fig. 5; Table 3). CC alone also induced enhancements
of the positive connectivity between the pSMA/dACC and the IPS, and the
dlPFC to the IFJ; a trend-level (p = 92%) reduction in the inﬂuence of the
pSMA/dACC on the IFJ as also observed. WM acted uniquely to introduce
a negative modulation of the inﬂuence of the dlPFC on the pSMA/dACC.
All modulatory effects identiﬁed during model-space inference
(above) were found to have signiﬁcantly non-zero magnitudes, with
the exception of the impact of CC on IPS-to-IFJ connectivity and the
trend-level result reported immediately previous. The inﬂuence of CC
on IPS-IFJ interactions was also inconclusive in region-based analysis
of network function (Supplementary Information). Interestingly, the ab-
sence of the IPS-to-IFJ modulation yields the individual model structure
having the highest evidence based on model-level BMS. This result sug-
gests that while the modulation of IPS-to-IFJ connectivity is more repre-
sentative of the data when integrating out all other network properties,
its absence is more likely when considering the unique dependencies of
an individual network structure. Taken together, the application of a
combined model-space and parameter-space family-level inference
procedure, in addition to model-level and region-level inference, pro-
vide conﬁdence in the inferred model structure.

Discussion

This study provides novel insights into the shared and unique prop-
erties of functional integration underlying CC and WM within a

150

I.H. Harding et al. / NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

Fig. 5. Frontoparietal effective connectivity. Signiﬁcant (N95% posterior probability) task-independent intrinsic interactions (left), cognitive control related modulations (center), and work-
ing memory related modulations (right), based on Bayesian Model Averaging. Color gradients represent parameter magnitudes and are scaled independently for each set of results; see
Table 3 for empirical values.

common network of higher-order cortical regions. While many proper-
ties of the FPN were shared across CC and WM contexts, unique dynam-
ics in effective connectivity were also found to discriminate these
processes. First, of the brain regions representing the FPN, inputs into
the IFJ were found to be the most responsive to changes in cognitive de-
mand, regardless of context, possibly serving to adaptively engage
higher-order processes. Second, task-invariant (baseline) effective

Table 3
Connectivity parameters.

Source

Target

Estimate

Intrinsic connectivity
IFJ
SMA
IFJ
IPS
SMA
IPS
dlPFC
SMA
dlPFC
IFJ
dlPFC
IPS

SMA
IFJ
IPS
IFJ
IPS
SMA
SMA
dlPFC
IFJ
dlPFC
IPS
dlPFC

Cognitive control modulations
IFJ
SMA
IPS
SMA
IPS
dlPFC

SMA
IFJ
IFJ
IPS
SMA
IFJ

Working memory modulations
dlPFC
IFJ
IPS

SMA
SMA
SMA

0.46
0.78
0.40
−0.032
0.56
−0.059
−0.038
0.50
0.31
0.29
−0.10
−0.025

1.08
−0.26
0.030
0.46
−0.91
0.34

−1.32
1.88
−0.95

SD

0.056
0.052
0.051
0.065
0.051
0.065
0.059
0.046
0.056
0.059
0.056
0.058

0.11
0.18
0.17
0.21
0.21
0.16

0.14
0.16
0.15

p

1.00
1.00
1.00
0.69
1.00
0.82
0.74
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.96
0.67

1.00
0.92
0.58
0.99
1.00
0.99

1.00
1.00
1.00

Estimate = maximum a posteriori value of the posterior distribution (parameter magni-
tude estimate); SD = standard deviation; p = posterior probability; bold entries are sig-
niﬁcant at a threshold of p N 95%.

inﬂuences between prefrontal regions of the FPN were general bi-
directional, while frontal-to-parietal interactions were hierarchical in
nature. Finally, connectivity dynamics common to both contexts were
evident at inputs into the pSMA/dACC, while CC additionally inﬂuenced
rostral-to-caudal interactions within the lateral PFC and between the
pSMA/dACC and IPS; WM-unique modulations were restricted to the
inﬂuence of the dlPFC on the pSMA/dACC. Critically, network dynamics
occur almost ubiquitously at interactions involving the pSMA/dACC,
reﬂecting the core relevance of medial prefrontal interactions to the
function and ﬂexibility of the FPN during cognitive performance.

In line with current inference suggesting a primary role for the IFJ in
engaging cognition, this region has been previously implicated in the
encoding and updating of task-sets (e.g., targets of attention) relevant
to current behavioral demands. Furthermore, this region sits at a nexus
of bottom-up pathways governing stimulus-driven attention and top-
down pathways supporting perceptual and behavioral control (Badre,
2008; Brass and von Cramon, 2004; Brass et al., 2005a; Corbetta and
Shulman, 2002; Derrfuss et al., 2004; Derrfuss et al., 2005). Contextual
ambiguity and response uncertainty inherent to our CC and WM manip-
ulations may therefore trigger, or augment, task representations encoded
in the IFJ.

It is relevant to note that the FPN does not receive direct afferents
from the visual system. The bottom-up engagement of control resources
in the IFJ instead likely occurs indirectly via the ventral attention/salience
network, which includes regions of the temporo-parietal junction and the
anterior insula (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002; Palaniyappan et al., 2013;
Seeley et al., 2007; Vossel et al., 2012). Therefore, while visual perception
occurs via a posterior-to-anterior processing stream (Kravitz et al., 2011),
cognitive engagement instead relies on an indirect mechanism of pre-
frontal engagement which, in turn, feeds-back to posterior structures,
consistent with classical “top-down” control models (Gazzaley and
Nobre, 2012). This interpretation is also consistent with electrophysiolog-
ical evidence suggesting an earlier engagement of frontal as compared to
parietal activity related to cognitive control processes (Brass et al., 2005b;
Gobbele et al., 2008; Grent-'t-Jong and Woldorff, 2007; Liotti et al., 2000);
but see also (Green and McDonald, 2008).

I.H. Harding et al. / NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

151

Bi-directional, positive interactions between the three prefrontal re-
gions of the FPN (IFJ, dlPFC, pSMA/dACC) were almost universally evi-
dent, irrespective of task context, suggesting a highly interactive
“baseline” exchange of information between these regions. This ﬁnding
is consistent with resting-state connectivity studies supporting tight
functional integration between these regions (Raichle, 2011), and
electrophysiological signals evidencing signal propagation in both
directions along the medial–lateral axis of the prefrontal cortex,
e.g., (Hanslmayr et al., 2008; Markela-Lerenc et al., 2004; Silton et al.,
2010). On top of this foundation, variations in the strength of these in-
teractions as a function of task demands were sparse, yet almost exclu-
sively conﬁned to interactions involving the pSMA/dACC. The robust
upregulation of the inﬂuence of the IFJ on the pSMA/dACC by both CC
and WM points to a common mechanism that may underlie initiation
of action-selection, response preparation, outcome monitoring, and
error prediction — processes localized to the pSMA/dACC (Alexander
and Brown, 2011; Isoda and Hikosaka, 2007; Nachev et al., 2008;
Rushworth et al., 2007) - in accordance with the context-relevant
task-set represented in the IFJ (Brass et al., 2005a). Taken together, the
engagement of the FPN via the lateral prefrontal cortex and the ob-
served medial–lateral task-related dynamics within the network are
broadly consistent with the ‘cascade-of-control’ model of behavioral
control. This account posits that the postero-lateral PFC (i.e., IFJ) is re-
sponsible for creating and maintaining a task-relevant attentional set
while downstream medial areas serve to gate/select between compet-
ing task responses and evaluate response outcomes (Banich, 2009;
Silton et al., 2010). Our work hence lends weight to this model as a gen-
eralizable framework governing higher-order brain function.

Cognitive control demands were additionally associated with an up-
regulation of anterior-to-posterior connectivity within the lateral PFC,
consistent with hierarchical models of control-related function along
the rostro-causal axis of the PFC (Badre and D'Esposito, 2009;
Koechlin and Summerﬁeld, 2007). The dlPFC – the putative seat of
sustained behavioral control and temporally-extended goal mainte-
nance (Badre, 2008) – has been previously shown to dynamically bias
more concrete and immediate task-sets in posterior areas, including
the IFJ, as a function of control demands (Koechlin and Summerﬁeld,
2007; Koechlin et al., 2003; Kouneiher et al., 2009). This effect may be
speciﬁc to disambiguating competing stimulus–response tendencies
or conﬂicting attentional sets, requirements speciﬁc to CC as compared
to WM processes.

In contrast to the reciprocal interactions deﬁning connectivity with-
in the PFC, fronto-parietal interactions were hierarchical in nature and
selectively gated by CC demands. While these interactions do not repre-
sent ‘top-down’ relationships per se, as all areas of the FPN lie within as-
sociation cortices, this ﬁnding does suggest that the representation of
behavioral goals and outcome contingencies in prefrontal regions may
serve to bias context representations and stimulus–response associa-
tions encoded in the IPS (Bunge et al., 2002; Corbetta and Shulman,
2002; Rushworth et al., 2001); as before, WM processes may not require
such arbitration. Notably, however, fronto-parietal connectivity dynam-
ics related to WM processes have been reported in previous studies
(Edin et al., 2009; Honey et al., 2002; Sauseng et al., 2005), including
several recent DCM investigations (Deserno et al., 2012; Dima et al.,
2014; Ma et al., 2012; Schmidt et al., 2014). However, consensus has
not yet emerged regarding the direction (frontal-to-parietal, or vice
versa), laterality, or speciﬁc source/target regions that underlie ob-
served WM-related modulations. Differences among studies may be at-
tributable to distinct model structures (e.g., inputs into parietal vs.
frontal regions), heuristics employed to facilitate inference, or the inclu-
sion of different sets of cortical regions in network models. While the
current study does not provide evidence in favor of changes to
prefrontal-superior parietal connectivity as a function of WM demands,
this line of inquiry clearly requires further attention.

Finally, evidence of transient, task-related negative feedback from
parietal and lateral prefrontal regions to the pSMA/dACC provides a

putative mechanism for balancing the engagement of effortful cognitive
resources, c.f., (Botvinick et al., 2001; MacDonald et al., 2000). As ab-
stract task representations or sustained WM-related activity become
established in the dlPFC, and context/intention maps in the IPS are aug-
mented or updated in response to current demands, superordinate eval-
uative processes in the pSMA/dACC may, in turn, be damped. Taken
alongside the observation that all but one of the identiﬁed task-related
modulations of FPN connectivity involved the pSMA/dACC, these results
support a central role for the medial prefrontal cortex in directing CC
and WM processes in the brain.

Overall, this study builds substantially upon current knowledge re-
garding functional integration in the FPN through the use of a compre-
hensive modeling approach. By accruing evidence and undertaking
inference across a large number of putative model structures, we es-
chew speciﬁc assumptions regarding network characteristics. The
present results are therefore robust to the idiosyncrasies that may char-
acterize individual models, providing for greater conﬁdence when gen-
eralizing these results. Moreover, this work moves beyond pair-wise
interactions along the medial–lateral and rostro–caudal axes of the
PFC, as well as anterior–posterior interactions across the cortex, that
have predominated neurobiological models of CC and WM to date. We
have also employed an experimental task design that allows for direct
comparison of unique cognitive demands on a common neural
framework.

A number of limitations of the present study provide targets for fu-
ture work. First, the network we characterized was limited to a few
key regions. Future investigation of right-lateralized and inter-
hemispheric interactions, as well as incorporation of other brain regions
central to cognitive functioning, such as the anterior insula (Fan et al.,
2014; Menon and Uddin, 2010), basal ganglia (Aron et al., 2007), and
cerebellum (Georgiou-Karistianis et al., 2012) into modeling analyses
may help further reﬁne descriptions of relevant neural dynamics. The
top-down inﬂuence of cognitive systems on perceptual, motor, limbic,
and mnemonic functions also remains of great interest to the ﬁeld of
cognitive neuroscience (e.g., Feredoes et al., 2011; Zanto et al., 2011).
Furthermore, while we have used well-established exemplars of CC
and WM tasks, generalization of the current results to other behavioral
demands and task contexts (e.g., response inhibition; spatial stimuli)
will be essential for determining the task-general versus task-speciﬁc
characteristics of dynamic FPN function. Finally, while family-level rfx-
BMS provides for reliable and generalizable inference across models
and individuals, more subtle properties of network function may be in-
tegrated out of consideration. We have mitigated this issue by
performing inference across different network scales (i.e., individual
connections; individual nodes; individual models). However, future
work will be necessary to disambiguate the inﬂuence of more
circumscribed network characteristics over and above the robust foun-
dation established herein.

In sum, this work highlights shared and unique dynamics of the large-
scale interconnectivity deﬁning the FPN across distinct cognitive de-
mands. Common connectivity dynamics may underlie the engagement
of action selection and performance evaluation processes. Conversely,
the need to augment task and context representations may be speciﬁc
to reallocating cognitive resources (i.e., cognitive control), as compared
to actively maintaining and manipulating information in mind
(i.e., working memory). Such ﬂexible functional integration may provide
a mechanistic foundation that describes the adaptability of neural repre-
sentations within this common system, underlining the extraordinary
ﬂexibility inherent to human cognition.

Acknowledgments

This study was supported by funding from the Australian National
Health and Medical Research Council (Project Grant 1008921; Program
Grant 566529; Clinical Career Development Fellowship 628509 to B.J.H.;
Senior Principal Research Fellowship 628386 to C.P.; Senior Research

152

I.H. Harding et al. / NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

Fellowship 1021973 to M.Y.). The authors declare no competing ﬁnan-
cial interests.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.

doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.039.

References

Alexander, W.H., Brown, J.W., 2011. Medial prefrontal cortex as an action-outcome pre-

dictor. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1338–1344.

Aron, A.R., Durston, S., Eagle, D.M., Logan, G.D., Stinear, C.M., Stuphorn, V., 2007. Converg-
ing evidence for a fronto–basal-ganglia network for inhibitory control of action and
cognition. J. Neurosci. 27, 11860–11864.

Ashburner, J., 2007. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm. Neuroimage 38,

95–113.

Baddeley, A., 2003. Working memory: looking back and looking forward. Nat. Rev.

Neurosci. 4, 829–839.

Badre, D., 2008. Cognitive control, hierarchy, and the rostro–caudal organization of the

frontal lobes. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12, 193–200.

Badre, D., D'Esposito, M., 2009. Is the rostro–caudal axis of the frontal lobe hierarchical?

Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 659–669.

Banich, M., 2009. Executive function: the search for an integrated account. Curr. Dir.

Psychol. Sci. 18, 89–94.

Black, P.E., 2005. Greedy algorithm. In: Black, P.E. (Ed.), Dictionary of Algorithms and Data

Structures. U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology.

Botvinick, M.M., Braver, T.S., Barch, D.M., Carter, C.S., Cohen, J.D., 2001. Conﬂict monitoring

and cognitive control. Psychol. Rev. 108, 624–652.

Brass, M., von Cramon, D.Y., 2004. Decomposing components of task preparation with

functional magnetic resonance imaging. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16, 609–620.

Brass, M., Derrfuss, J., Forstmann, B., von Cramon, D.Y., 2005a. The role of the inferior fron-

tal junction area in cognitive control. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9, 314–316.

Brass, M., Ullsperger, M., Knoesche, T.R., von Cramon, D.Y., Phillips, N.A., 2005b. Who
comes ﬁrst? The role of the prefrontal and parietal cortex in cognitive control. J.
Cogn. Neurosci. 17, 1367–1375.

Bunge, S.A., Hazeltine, E., Scanlon, M.D., Rosen, A.C., Gabrieli, J.D., 2002. Dissociable contri-
butions of prefrontal and parietal cortices to response selection. Neuroimage 17,
1562–1571.

Bush, G., Shin, L.M., 2006. The multi-source interference task: an fMRI task that reliably
activates the cingulo–frontal–parietal cognitive/attention network. Nat. Protoc. 1,
308–313.

Carter, C.S., van Veen, V., 2007. Anterior cingulate cortex and conﬂict detection: an update

of theory and data. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 7, 367–379.

Cieslik, E.C., Zilles, K., Grefkes, C., Eickhoff, S.B., 2011. Dynamic interactions in the fronto-
parietal network during a manual stimulus–response compatibility task. Neuroimage
58, 860–869.

Cocchi, L., Zalesky, A., Fornito, A., Mattingley, J.B., 2013. Dynamic cooperation and compe-
tition between brain systems during cognitive control. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 493–501.
Cole, M.W., Schneider, W., 2007. The cognitive control network: integrated cortical re-

gions with dissociable functions. Neuroimage 37, 343–360.

Cole, M.W., Reynolds, J.R., Power, J.D., Repovs, G., Anticevic, A., Braver, T.S., 2013. Multi-
task connectivity reveals ﬂexible hubs for adaptive task control. Nat. Neurosci. 16,
1348–1355.

Corbetta, M., Shulman, G.L., 2002. Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention

in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 201–215.

Daunizeau, J., David, O., Stephan, K.E., 2011. Dynamic causal modelling: a critical review of

the biophysical and statistical foundations. Neuroimage 58, 312–322.

Derrfuss, J., Brass, M., von Cramon, D.Y., 2004. Cognitive control in the posterior
frontolateral cortex: evidence from common activations in task coordination, inter-
ference control, and working memory. Neuroimage 23, 604–612.

Derrfuss, J., Brass, M., Neumann, J., von Cramon, D.Y., 2005. Involvement of the inferior
frontal junction in cognitive control: meta-analyses of switching and Stroop studies.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 25, 22–34.

Deserno, L., Sterzer, P., Wustenberg, T., Heinz, A., Schlagenhauf, F., 2012. Reduced
prefrontal-parietal effective connectivity and working memory deﬁcits in schizo-
phrenia. J. Neurosci. 32, 12–20.

Dima, D., Jogia, J., Frangou, S., 2014. Dynamic causal modeling of load-dependent modu-
lation of effective connectivity within the verbal working memory network. Hum.
Brain Mapp. 35, 3025–3035.

Dosenbach, N.U., Fair, D.A., Cohen, A.L., Schlaggar, B.L., Petersen, S.E., 2008. A dual-

networks architecture of top-down control. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12, 99–105.

Duncan, J., 2001. An adaptive coding model of neural function in prefrontal cortex. Nat.

Rev. Neurosci. 2, 820–829.

Edin, F., Klingberg, T., Johansson, P., McNab, F., Tegner, J., Compte, A., 2009. Mechanism for
top-down control of working memory capacity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106,
6802–6807.

Eriksen, B.A., Eriksen, C.W., 1974. Effects of noise letters upon the identiﬁcation of a target

letter in a nonsearch task. Atten. Percept. Psychophys. 16, 143–149.

Fan, J., Hof, P.R., Guise, K.G., Fossella, J.A., Posner, M.I., 2008. The functional integration of
the anterior cingulate cortex during conﬂict processing. Cereb. Cortex 18, 796–805.

Fan, J., Van Dam, N.T., Gu, X., Liu, X., Wang, H., Tang, C.Y., Hof, P.R., 2014. Quantitative char-
acterization of functional anatomical contributions to cognitive control under uncer-
tainty. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 26, 1490–1506.

Fedorenko, E., Duncan, J., Kanwisher, N., 2013. Broad domain generality in focal regions of

frontal and parietal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 16616–16621.

Feredoes, E., Heinen, K., Weiskopf, N., Ruff, C., Driver, J., 2011. Causal evidence for frontal
involvement in memory target maintenance by posterior brain areas during
distracter interference of visual working memory. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108,
17510–17515.

First, M.B., Spitzer, R.L., Gibbon, M., Williams, J.B., 2002. Structured Clinical Interview for
DSM-IV-TR Axis I Disorders, Research Version, Non-patient Edition. Biometrics Re-
search, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York.

Friston, K.J., 2011. Functional and effective connectivity: a review. Brain Connect. 1,

13–36.

Friston, K.J., Mechelli, A., Turner, R., Price, C.J., 2000. Nonlinear responses in fMRI: the Bal-

loon model, Volterra kernels, and other hemodynamics. Neuroimage 12, 466–477.

Friston, K.J., Harrison, L., Penny, W., 2003. Dynamic causal modelling. Neuroimage 19,

1273–1302.

Friston, K., Mattout, J., Trujillo-Barreto, N., Ashburner, J., Penny, W., 2007. Variational free

energy and the Laplace approximation. Neuroimage 34, 220–234.

Friston, K., Moran, R., Seth, A.K., 2013. Analysing connectivity with Granger causality and

dynamic causal modelling. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 172–178.

Gazzaley, A., Nobre, A.C., 2012. Top-down modulation: bridging selective attention and

working memory. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 129–135.

Georgiou-Karistianis, N., Akhlaghi, H., Corben, L.A., Delatycki, M.B., Storey, E., Bradshaw,
J.L., Egan, G.F., 2012. Decreased functional brain activation in Friedreich ataxia using
the Simon effect task. Brain Cogn. 79, 200–208.

Gobbele, R., Lamberty, K., Stephan, K.E., Stegelmeyer, U., Buchner, H., Marshall, J.C., Fink,
G.R., Waberski, T.D., 2008. Temporal activation patterns of lateralized cognitive and
task control processes in the human brain. Brain Res. 1205, 81–90.

Green, J.J., McDonald, J.J., 2008. Electrical neuroimaging reveals timing of attentional con-

trol activity in human brain. PLoS Biol. 6, e81.

Grent-'t-Jong, T., Woldorff, M.G., 2007. Timing and sequence of brain activity in top-down

control of visual–spatial attention. PLoS Biol. 5, e12.

Hanslmayr, S., Pastotter, B., Bauml, K.H., Gruber, S., Wimber, M., Klimesch, W., 2008. The
electrophysiological dynamics of interference during the Stroop task. J. Cogn.
Neurosci. 20, 215–225.

Harding, I.H., Harrison, B.J., Breakspear, M., Pantelis, C., Yucel, M., 2014. Cortical represen-
tations of cognitive control and working memory are dependent yet non-interacting.
Cereb. Cortex (in press).

Honey, G.D., Fu, C.H., Kim, J., Brammer, M.J., Croudace, T.J., Suckling, J., Pich, E.M., Williams,
S.C., Bullmore, E.T., 2002. Effects of verbal working memory load on corticocortical
connectivity modeled by path analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging
data. Neuroimage 17, 573–582.

Isoda, M., Hikosaka, O., 2007. Switching from automatic to controlled action by monkey

medial frontal cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 240–248.

Kadohisa, M., Petrov, P., Stokes, M., Sigala, N., Buckley, M., Gaffan, D., Kusunoki, M.,
Duncan, J., 2013. Dynamic construction of a coherent attentional state in a prefrontal
cell population. Neuron 80, 235–246.

Koechlin, E., Summerﬁeld, C., 2007. An information theoretical approach to prefrontal ex-

ecutive function. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 229–235.

Koechlin, E., Ody, C., Kouneiher, F., 2003. The architecture of cognitive control in the

human prefrontal cortex. Science 302, 1181–1185.

Kouneiher, F., Charron, S., Koechlin, E., 2009. Motivation and cognitive control in the

human prefrontal cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 939–945.

Kravitz, D.J., Saleem, K.S., Baker, C.I., Mishkin, M., 2011. A new neural framework for vi-

suospatial processing. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12, 217–230.

Liotti, M., Woldorff, M.G., Perez, R., Mayberg, H.S., 2000. An ERP study of the temporal
course of the Stroop color-word interference effect. Neuropsychologia 38, 701–711.
Ma, L., Steinberg, J.L., Hasan, K.M., Narayana, P.A., Kramer, L.A., Moeller, F.G., 2012. Work-
ing memory load modulation of parieto-frontal connections: evidence from dynamic
causal modeling. Hum. Brain Mapp. 33, 1850–1867.

MacDonald III, A.W., Cohen, J.D., Stenger, V.A., Carter, C.S., 2000. Dissociating the role of
the dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in cognitive control. Science
288, 1835–1838.

Markela-Lerenc, J., Ille, N., Kaiser, S., Fiedler, P., Mundt, C., Weisbrod, M., 2004. Prefrontal–
cingulate activation during executive control: which comes ﬁrst? Brain Res. Cogn.
Brain Res. 18, 278–287.

Menon, V., Uddin, L.Q., 2010. Saliency, switching, attention and control: a network model

of insula function. Brain Struct. Funct. 214, 655–667.

Nachev, P., Kennard, C., Husain, M., 2008. Functional role of the supplementary and pre-

supplementary motor areas. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 856–869.

Niendam, T.A., Laird, A.R., Ray, K.L., Dean, Y.M., Glahn, D.C., Carter, C.S., 2012. Meta-
analytic evidence for a superordinate cognitive control network subserving diverse
executive functions. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 12, 241–268.

Palaniyappan, L., Simmonite, M., White, T.P., Liddle, E.B., Liddle, P.F., 2013. Neural primacy

of the salience processing system in schizophrenia. Neuron 79, 814–828.

Penny, W.D., Stephan, K.E., Daunizeau, J., Rosa, M.J., Friston, K.J., Schoﬁeld, T.M., Leff, A.P.,
2010. Comparing families of dynamic causal models. PLoS Comput. Biol. 6, e1000709.
Power, J.D., Cohen, A.L., Nelson, S.M., Wig, G.S., Barnes, K.A., Church, J.A., Vogel, A.C.,
Laumann, T.O., Miezin, F.M., Schlaggar, B.L., Petersen, S.E., 2011. Functional network
organization of the human brain. Neuron 72, 665–678.

Prado, J., Carp, J., Weissman, D.H., 2011. Variations of response time in a selective atten-
tion task are linked to variations of functional connectivity in the attentional network.
Neuroimage 54, 541–549.

Raichle, M.E., 2011. The restless brain. Brain Connect. 1, 3–12.

I.H. Harding et al. / NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

153

Rushworth, M.F., Paus, T., Sipila, P.K., 2001. Attention systems and the organization of the

Simon, J.R., Berbaum, K., 1990. Effect of conﬂicting cues on information processing: the

human parietal cortex. J. Neurosci. 21, 5262–5271.

Rushworth, M.F., Buckley, M.J., Behrens, T.E., Walton, M.E., Bannerman, D.M., 2007. Func-
tional organization of the medial frontal cortex. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 17, 220–227.
Sauseng, P., Klimesch, W., Schabus, M., Doppelmayr, M., 2005. Fronto-parietal EEG coher-
ence in theta and upper alpha reﬂect central executive functions of working memory.
Int. J. Psychophysiol. 57, 97–103.

Schlosser, R.G., Wagner, G., Koch, K., Dahnke, R., Reichenbach, J.R., Sauer, H., 2008. Fronto-
cingulate effective connectivity in major depression: a study with fMRI and dynamic
causal modeling. Neuroimage 43, 645–655.

Schlosser, R.G., Wagner, G., Schachtzabel, C., Peikert, G., Koch, K., Reichenbach, J.R., Sauer,
H., 2010. Fronto-cingulate effective connectivity in obsessive compulsive disorder: a
study with fMRI and dynamic causal modeling. Hum. Brain Mapp. 31, 1834–1850.

Schmidt, A., Smieskova, R., Simon, A., Allen, P., Fusar-Poli, P., McGuire, P.K., Bendfeldt, K.,
Aston, J., Lang, U.E., Walter, M., Radue, E.W., Riecher-Rossler, A., Borgwardt, S.J.,
2014. Abnormal effective connectivity and psychopathological symptoms in the psy-
chosis high-risk state. J. Psychiatry Neurosci. 39, 130102.

Seeley, W.W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A.F., Keller, J., Glover, G.H., Kenna, H., Reiss, A.L.,
Greicius, M.D., 2007. Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience process-
ing and executive control. J. Neurosci. 27, 2349–2356.

Silton, R.L., Heller, W., Towers, D.N., Engels, A.S., Spielberg, J.M., Edgar, J.C., Sass, S.M.,
Stewart, J.L., Sutton, B.P., Banich, M.T., Miller, G.A., 2010. The time course of activity
in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex during top-down at-
tentional control. Neuroimage 50, 1292–1302.

‘Stroop effect’ vs. the ‘Simon effect’. Acta Psychol. (Amst) 73, 159–170.

Stephan, K.E., Marshall, J.C., Friston, K.J., Rowe, J.B., Ritzl, A., Zilles, K., Fink, G.R., 2003.
Lateralized cognitive processes and lateralized task control in the human brain. Sci-
ence 301, 384–386.

Stephan, K.E., Kasper, L., Harrison, L.M., Daunizeau, J., den Ouden, H.E.M., Breakspear, M.,
Friston, K.J., 2008. Nonlinear dynamic causal models for fMRI. Neuroimage 42, 649–662.
Stephan, K.E., Penny, W.D., Daunizeau, J., Moran, R.J., Friston, K.J., 2009. Bayesian model

selection for group studies. Neuroimage 46, 1004–1017.

Stephan, K.E., Penny, W.D., Moran, R.J., den Ouden, H.E., Daunizeau, J., Friston, K.J., 2010.

Ten simple rules for dynamic causal modeling. Neuroimage 49, 3099–3109.

Stokes, M.G., Kusunoki, M., Sigala, N., Nili, H., Gaffan, D., Duncan, J., 2013. Dynamic coding

for cognitive control in prefrontal cortex. Neuron 78, 364–375.

Vossel, S., Weidner, R., Driver, J., Friston, K.J., Fink, G.R., 2012. Deconstructing the architec-
ture of dorsal and ventral attention systems with dynamic causal modeling. J.
Neurosci. 32, 10637–10648.

Wang, L., Liu, X., Guise, K.G., Knight, R.T., Ghajar, J., Fan, J., 2010. Effective connectivity of
the fronto-parietal network during attentional control. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 22,
543–553.

Wechsler, D., 1999. Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence Manual. The Psychological

Corporation, San Antonio.

Zanto, T.P., Rubens, M.T., Thangavel, A., Gazzaley, A., 2011. Causal role of the prefrontal
cortex in top-down modulation of visual processing and working memory. Nat.
Neurosci. 14, 656–661.

