BAILII Citation Number: [1977] EWCA Civ 6

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE 
COURT OF APPEAL
ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
DURHAM DISTRICT REGISTRY
(MR. JUSTICE REEVE) 

Case No.: 1975 M. No. 173

B e f o r e :

Royal Courts of Justice.

6th April 1977.

THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS (Lord Denning)

LORD JUSTICE GEOFFREY LANE
LORD JUSTICE CUMMING-BRUCE

and

____________________

JOHN EDWARD MILLER
First Plaintiff (Respondent 

and

BRENDA THERESA MILLER

Second Plaintiff (Respondent) 

-v-

R. JACKSON

First Defendant (Appellant) 

and

J. J. CROMERTY

Second Defendant (Appellant) 

(On their own behalf and on behalf of all other members of the Lintz Cricket 

Club)

____________________

(Transcript of the Shorthand Notes of the Association of 

Ofﬁcial Shorthandwriters Ltd., Room 392, Royal Courts of Justice, 

and 2 New Square, Lincoln's Inn, London, W.C.2).

____________________

1

Crown Copyright ©

THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: In summertime village cricket is the delight of everyone. 
Nearly every village has its own cricket ﬁeld where the young men play and the old men watch. In 
the village of Lintz in County Durham they have their own ground, where they have played these 
last seventy years. They tend it well. The wicket area is well rolled and mown. The outﬁeld is kept 
short. It has a good club-house for the players and seats for the onlookers. The village team play 
there on Saturdays and Sundays. They belong to a league, competing with the neighbouring 
villages. On other evenings after work they practice while the light lasts. Yet now after these 70 
years a Judge of the High Court has ordered that they must not play there anymore, lie has issued an 
injunction to stop them. He has done it at the instance of a newcomer who is no lover of cricket. 
This newcomer has built, or has had built for him, a house on the edge of the cricket ground which 
four years ago was a ﬁeld where cattle grazed. The animals did not mind the cricket. But now this 
adjoining ﬁeld has been turned into a housing estate. The newcomer bought one of the houses on 
the edge of the cricket ground. No doubt the open space was a selling point. Now he complains that, 
when a batsman hits a six, the ball has been known to land in his garden or on or near his house. His 
wife has got so upset about it that they always go out at weekends. They do not go into the garden 
when cricket is being played. They say that this is intolerable. So they asked the Judge to stop the 
cricket being played. And the Judge, I am sorry to say, feels that the cricket must be stopped: with 
the consequences, I suppose, that the Lintz cricket-club will disappear. The cricket ground will be 
turned to some other use. I expect for more houses or a factory. The young men will turn to other 
things instead of cricket. The whole village will be much the poorer. And all this because of a 
newcomer who has just bought a house there next to the cricket ground.
I must say that I am surprised that the developers of the housing estate were allowed to build the 
houses so close to the cricket ground. No doubt they wanted to make the most of their site and put 
up as many houses as they could for their own proﬁt. The planning authorities ought not to have 
allowed it. The houses ought to have been so sited as not to interfere with the cricket. But the 
houses have been built and we have to reckon with the consequences.
At the time when the houses were built it was obvious to the people of Lintz that these new houses 
were built too close to the cricket ground. It was a small ground, and there might be trouble when a 
batsman hit a ball out of the ground. But there was no trouble in ﬁnding purchasers. Some of them 
may have been cricket enthusiasts. But others were not. In the ﬁrst three years - 1972, 1973 and 
1974 - quite a number of balls came over or under the boundary fence and went into the gardens of 
the houses: and the cricketers went round to get them. A lady in one of the houses, a Mrs. Miller, of 
house number 20, Brackenridge, was very annoyed about this. To use her own words:
"...When the balls come over, they the cricketers, either ring or come round in two's and three's and 
ask if they can have the ball back, and they never ask properly. They just ask if they can have the 
ball back, and that's it. They have been very rude, very arrogant and very ignorant, and very 
deceitful ... to get away from any problems we make a point of going out on Wednesdays, Fridays 
and the week-ends."

Having read the evidence, I am sure that was a most unfair complaint to make of the cricketers. 
They have done their very best to be polite. It must be admitted, however, that on a few occasions 
before 1974 a tile was broken or a window smashed.
The householders made the most of this and got their rates reduced. The cricket club then did 

2

everything possible to see that no balls went over. In 1975, before the cricket season opened, they 
put up a very high protective fence. The existing concrete fence was only six feet high. They raised 
it to nearly 15 feet high by a galvanised chain-link fence. It cost £700. They could not raise it any 
higher because of the wind. The cricket ground is 570 feet above sea level. During the winter even 
this high fence was blown down on one occasion and had to be repaired at a cost of £400. Not only 
did the club put up this high protective fence. They told the batsmen to try to drive the balls low for 
four and not hit them up for six. This greatly reduced the number of balls that got into the gardens. 
So much so that the rating authority no longer allowed any reduction in rates.
Despite these measures, a few balls did get over. The club made a tally of all the sixes hit during the 
seasons of 1975 and 1976. In 1975 there were 2,221 overs, that is, 13,326 balls bowled. Of them 
there were 120 six hits on all sides of the ground. Of these only six went over the high protective 
fence and into this housing estate. In 1976 there were 2,616 overs, that is 15,696 balls. Of them 
there were 160 six hits. Of these only 9 went over the high protective fence and into this housing 
estate.
No one has been hurt at all by any of these balls, either before or after the high fence was erected. 
There has, however, been some damage to property, even since the high fence was erected. The 
cricket club have offered to remedy all the damage and pay all expenses. They have offered to 
supply and ﬁt unbreakable glass in the windows, and shutters or safeguards for them. They have 
offered to supply and ﬁt a safety net over the garden whenever cricket is being played. In short, they 
have done everything possible snort of stopping playing cricket on the ground at all. But Mrs. 
Miller and her husband have remained unmoved. .Every offer by the club has been rejected. They 
demand the closing down of the cricket club. Nothing else will satisfy them. They have obtained 
legal aid to sue the cricket club.
In support of the case, the Plaintiff relies on the dictum of Lord Reid in Bolton v. Stone [1951] AC 
850, at page 867:

"If cricket cannot be played on a ground without creating a substantial risk, then it should not be 
played there at all".

I would agree with that saying if the houses or road was there ﬁrst, and the cricket ground came 
there second. We would not allow the garden of Lincoln's Inn to be turned into a cricket ground. It 
would be too dangerous for windows and people. But I do not agree with Lord Reid's dictum when 
the cricket ground has been there for 70 years and the houses are newly built at the very edge of it. I 
recognise that the cricket club are under a duty to use all reasonable care consistently with the 
playing of the game of cricket, but I do not think the cricket club can be expected to give up the 
game of cricket altogether. After all they have their rights in their cricket ground. They have spent 
money, labour and love in the making of it: and they have the right to play upon it as they have 
done for 70 years. Is this all to be rendered useless to them by the thoughtless and selﬁsh act of an 
estate developer in building right up to the edge of it? Can the developer or a purchaser of the house 
say to the cricket club: "Stop playing. Clear out". I do not think so. And I will give my reasons.

3

