 

Introduction to U.S. Law

Court Procedure

 

How a Trial Works

http://www.annenbergclassroom.org/page/faqs-juries

 

 

 

 

 

 

Characteristics of the 
Adversarial System

● Parties dictate the form, content and speed of 

the process.

● Pre-Trial process allows parties to “discover” 

information (“facts”).

● At trail, the judge takes a “back seat” to the 

advocates.
➢ it is the job of the advocates to present evidence to 

the fact finder (judge or jury)

● Throughout the process witnesses and evidence 

are “examined” by the advocates.

 

Criminal v. Civil

● Names of the Parties
● Number of People Involved
● Penalty/Remedy
● Burden of Proof

● NOTE – there are vast differences between the 

two when it comes to procedure.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Civil Cases

Procedure in Civil Court

 

Rules of Civil Procedure

● The federal system and each state of their own 

rules.
– they are not all that different

● Rule 1. - Scope and Purpose

– These rules govern the procedure in all civil actions 
and proceedings in the United States district courts, 
except as stated in Rule 81. They should be 
construed and administered to secure the just, 
speedy, and inexpensive determination of every 
action and proceeding.

– http://www.law.cornell.edu/rules/frcp/

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Statute of Limitations

● Laws stating by when a case must be filed.
● Purpose is to ensure that evidence is “fresh”, 

which theoretically ensures fairness.

● Varies by jurisdiction
● Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 335.1. Within two years: 
An action for assault, battery, or injury to, or for 
the death of, an individual caused by the 
wrongful act or neglect of another. 

 

 

 

 

First Stage: Pleadings

● Definition – allegations of law and fact.
● Plaintiff Files – complaint, petition or claims

– sets forth elements of claims

● Defendant Files – answer, response, demurrer

– Can also file Motion to Dismiss at this point
– Different forms depending on jurisdiction

● general v. specific denials.

– Affirmative defenses can be raised

● eg. Assumption of Risk (negligence), Consent (battery)

 

Historical Roots

● Historical Functions of Pleadings

– provide notice
– set forth facts
– narrow issues

● Today there are two varieties of pleadings

– Code – must set out in the complaint facts sufficient 

to establish a cause of action.

– Notice – must set out in complaint facts sufficient to 

put defendant on notice of the legal claims.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Discovery

● Exchange and 
investigation of 
evidence between 
parties.

● Purpose:

– Expedite litigation
– Encourage settlement

 

Scope of Discovery

● information which "appears reasonably 

calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible 
evidence."
– Federal Rules of Civil Procedure

● Not Work Product!

 

 

 

 

 

 

Discovery Devices

● Deposition
● Interrogatories
● Demand to Inspect/Produce Documents
● Request for Admission
● Physical/Mental Examinations

 

 

 

Deposition

● Examination under oath of an expected party or 

witness for discovery or as evidence.

● Advantages
● Testimony may be used by
● Disadvantages
● Against Whom?

 

 

 

 

Interrogatories

● written questions to 

party to be answered 
under oath
● Advantages
● Use
● Disadvantages
● Against Whom?

 

Demand to Inspect Documents

● Demand to Inspect

–  A party may make inspection demands on "any 

other party to the action" to produce and permit the 
party making the request to inspect and copy, any 
designated documents.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Request for Admission

● Written request asking opposing party to admit 
genuineness of documents or truth of matters.

● Party must respond or deemed to admit.
● Only against parties.
● Advantages v. Disadvantages

 

 

 

Physical & Mental Exams

● Order from Court
● Upon showing of 

good cause

● of physical or mental 
examination of party

● when mental or 

physical state is in 
controversy.

 

 

 

 

Discovery in Criminal Cases

● Crime scene evidence such as photographs and other 

forensic evidence

● Witness, law enforcement, and even defendant 

testimony, as well as the names, addresses of all 
intended witnesses at a given trial

● Police reports, written or oral testimony from 

witnesses, booking reports, toxicology results from 
defendants, and DNA evidence offered by defendants
● Any intended expert witness testimony intended to be 

used during trial

● Virtually any other form of “raw” evidence obtained by 

the prosecutor’s office

 

Pre-Trial Proceedings

● Court will rule on pre-trial motions

– motions pertaining to discovery (although probably 

heard earlier)

● Motion for Summary Judgment

– asking the court to rule as a matter of law
– When the court grants this motion, it is saying that 
there are no facts in dispute that are necessary to 
decide the case.
● “no genuine issue of material facts”

 

 

 

 

 

 

Opening Statement

 

 

 

 

 

Direct Examination

● This is each party calling their witness.
● Party calling the witness goes first, opposing 

party then gets chance to cross exam
– more on this later.

● Goal here is to allow the witness to tell his or 

her story.
– lawyer will ask questions to assist with framing the 

story.

– lawyer will highlight for the jury important parts.

 

Direct Examination

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bBpylztGz3I

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cross Examination

● Goal is to raise 
questions about 
witness testimony or 
discredit the witness.

● Usually done with 
questions that can 
only be answered yes 
or no.

 

Rebuttal Questions

● Goal is to rehabilitate the witness after cross-

examinations.

● Questions are limited only to those areas of the 

testimony over which opposing party's 
questions may have cast doubt.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Evidence Defined

● matters that tend to prove the existence or non-

existence of some fact (Oxford Dict. of Law)

● those matters actually admitted into evidence by the 
judge presiding, as in 'the evidence before the court'
● body of rules that govern what can and what cannot 
be brought before a court in any particular case, and 
the weight that it should have, as in ‘the law of 
evidence’ (Collins Dict. of the Law). 

● '"Evidence" means testimony, writings, material 

objects, or other things presented to the senses that 
are offered to prove the existence or nonexistence of a 
fact.‘ Cal. Evid. Code § 140

 

Relevance

● To be admissible court, evidence must be 

relevant and material
– Compare to definition for discovery.

● “Relevant evidence means evidence having any 
tendency to make the existence of any fact that 
is of consequence to the determination of the 
action more probable or less probable than it 
would be without the evidence.”
– Federal Rule 401

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hearsay

● Evidence of a statement that was made other 

than by a witness while testifying at the hearing 
and that is offered to prove the truth of the 
matter stated (Cal. Evid. Code § 1200; Rule 
33.1, Civ. Proc. Rules for Engl. and Wales) may 
be inadmissible as 'hearsay evidence'

● There are numerous exceptions to this rule.

 

Best Evidence Rule

● The best evidence rule nowadays requires that 
the original of a document must be produced in 
court in order to prove the document's contents, 
unless the proposing party offers an adequate 
explanation for her failure to produce the 
original (Oxford Dict. of Law)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Privilege

● In the law of evidence certain persons in certain 

situations enjoy a privilege not to testify
– Privilege against self-incrimination

● which accords witnesses a right not to testify or otherwise 
reveal evidence that might expose themselves to criminal 
prosecution

● The legal professional or 'attorney-client' 

privilege protects confidential communications 
between lawyers and their clients.

 

Directed Verdict

● Ruling by the judge that no reasonable jury to 

find for the non-moving party.

● Usually only used in civil cases.
● Usually only used in cases with a jury.
● Can be raised after the party with the burden of 

proof presents his or her case.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Closing Arguments

● Goal is to help the jury connect the facts to the 

law in a manner favorable to one's client.

● Remind jury of important testimony or evidence.
● Explain to jury how this evidence relates to the 

law.

● Help jury understand the law, at least how it 

relates to the evidence.

 

Jury Instructions

1201.  Strict Liability—Manufacturing Defect—Essential Factual 
Elements
[Name of plaintiff] claims that the [product] contained a manufacturing 
defect. To establish this claim, [name of plaintiff] must prove all of the 
following: 
1. That [name of defendant] [manufactured/distributed/sold] the 

[product];

2. That the [product] contained a manufacturing defect when it left 

[name of defendant]’s possession;

3. That the [product] was used [or misused] in a way that was 

reasonably foreseeable to [name of defendant];

4. That [name of plaintiff] was harmed; and
5. That the [product]’s defect was a substantial factor in causing [name 

of plaintiff]’s harm. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Judicial Control of Juries

● Directed Verdict

– motion made at end of opposing party's case 

arguing that there is insufficient evidence to send 
the case the jury.

● Judgment Notwithstanding the Verdict

– made after jury renders verdict
– reversal of a jury's verdict by the trial judge when 

the judge believes there was no factual basis for the 
verdict or it was contrary to law.

 

Integrity of Verdicts

● Motion for New Trial
● Grounds:

– irregularity
– jury misconduct
– newly discovered evidence
– insufficient evidence

 

 

 

 

 

