Philosophy  and  Phenomenological  Research
Vol.  LXXIII, No. 1, July 2006

Is Incompatibilism Intuitive?

EDDY  NAHMIAS
Georgia State University

STEPHEN  G. MORRIS
Missouri  Western  State  University

THOMAS  NADELHOFFER
Dickinson College

JASON  TURNER
Rutgers University

Incompatibilists  believe  free  will  is  impossible  if  determinism  is  true,  and  they  often
claim  that  this  view  is  supported  by  ordinary  intuitions.  We  challenge  the  claim  that
incompatibilism is intuitive to most  laypersons  and  discuss  the  significance  of  this  chal-
lenge  to  the  free  will  debate.  After  explaining  why  incompatibilists  should  want  their
view  to  accord  with  pretheoretical  intuitions,  we  suggest  that  determining  whether
incompatibilism is in fact intuitive calls for empirical testing. We  then  present  the  results
of our studies, which put  significant  pressure  on  the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is  intui-
tive. Finally, we consider and respond to several potential objections to our approach.

Incompatibilists believe that the freedom associated with moral responsibility
is  impossible  if  determinism is  true,  and  they  often  claim  that  this  is  the
natural view to take given  that  it  is  purportedly supported by  ordinary intui-
tions. In this paper, we challenge the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is  intuitive
to  most  laypersons, and we discuss the  significance of  this  challenge to  the
free will  debate. In  doing so,  we first  argue that  it  is  particularly  important
for incompatibilists  that  their view of  free will  is  intuitive  given  that  it  is
more metaphysically demanding than compatibilist alternatives (§1). We then
suggest  that  determining whether incompatibilism  is  in  fact  intuitive  calls
for empirical testing  of  pretheoretical  judgments  about  relevant  cases  (§2).
We therefore carried out  some  empirical studies of  our  own,  and  the  results
put significant pressure on the claim that  incompatibilism  is  intuitive  to  the
majority of  laypersons (§3).  Having examined the  relevant data, we consider
several potential  objections  to  our  approach and show  why  they  fail  to  get
incompatibilists  off the  hook  (§4).  We conclude that  while  our  preliminary
data suggest that incompatibilism is not as intuitive  as  incompatibilists  have

28    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

traditionally  assumed,  more  work  should  be  done  both  to  determine  what
ordinary intuitions about free will and moral responsibility actually are and to
understand what role these intuitions should play in the free will debate.

1. Why it matters whether incompatibilism is intuitive

By calling  the  free will  debate “the problem of  free  will  and  determinism,”
philosophers  have  traditionally  assumed  that  there  is  a  problem  with  the
compatibility of free will and determinism unless and until  proven otherwise.
Accordingly,  incompatibilists  commonly  lay  claim  to  having  the  default
position,  with  the  two  alternatives being  either that  we have  free  will—the
libertarian view—or that we do not—the hard determinist (or skeptical) view.
Carving out the philosophical territory in this way seems  to  place the  burden
of proof on compatibilists to provide an  argument to  show  why  what clearly
seems to be a problem is not really a problem.  Incompatibilists  suggest  that
such  attempts  to  analyze freedom along  compatibilist  lines  betray  common
sense and fail to satisfy the intuitions  of  ordinary people.  For  instance,  Rob-
ert Kane writes,

In  my  experience,  most  ordinary  persons  start  out  as  natural  incompatibilists.  They  believe
there is  some  kind  of  conflict  between  freedom  and  determinism;  and  the  idea  that  freedom
and responsibility might be compatible with determinism looks to them  at  first  like  a  ‘quagmire
of evasion’ (William James)  or  ‘a  wretched  subterfuge’  (Immanuel  Kant).  Ordinary  persons
have to be talked out of  this  natural  incompatibilism  by  the  clever  arguments  of  philosophers.
(1999: 217)

Similarly, Laura Ekstrom claims that “we come to the table, nearly  all  of  us,
as  pretheoretic incompatibilists”  (2002:  310).  Galen Strawson  contends  that
the incompatibilist  conception of  free will,  though  impossible  to  satisfy,  is
“just the kind  of  freedom that  most  people ordinarily and unreflectively sup-
pose  themselves to  possess” (1986:  30),  adding that  it  is  “in  our  nature  to
take determinism to pose a serious problem  for our  notions  of  responsibility
and freedom” (89).  And Thomas  Pink  tells  us  that  “most  of  us  start  off  by
making  an important  assumption  about  freedom. Our freedom of  action,  we
naturally  tend  to  assume,  must  be  incompatible  with  our  actions  being
determined” (2004: 12).1 On this view, because most  people purportedly have
the  intuition  that  determinism  conflicts  with  free  will,  any  conception  of
freedom that does not require the falsity of determinism for agents to  count  as
free and morally responsible is bound to be an evasion of—not  a solution  to
—the problem. But are incompatibilists justified in assuming  that  the  major-
ity of laypersons share their own incompatibilist intuitions about free will?

                                                                                                        
1
See also Smilansky (2003: 259),  Pereboom  (2001:  xvi),  O’Connor  (2000:  4),  and  Camp-
bell (1951: 451).

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    29

       
       

Of  course,  if  philosophers  were  concerned  exclusively  with  a  technical
philosophical concept of free will,  then  appeals like  those  above to  ordinary
people’s intuitions would be entirely irrelevant—just as they  would be irrele-
vant for logicians debating the  concept of validity or  mathematicians analyz-
ing the concept of infinity. But there  is  a reason why  philosophers appeal to
ordinary intuitions and common sense when they debate about  free will:  they
are interested in  developing a theory of  freedom that  is  relevant to  our  ordi-
nary  beliefs  about  moral  responsibility.  Given  that  most  philosophers  are
concerned with  the  kinds  of  free  will  “worth  wanting”  (Dennett  1984),  an
acceptable theory of free will should elucidate the abilities presupposed by our
practices of attributing praise and blame, our  expressions of  reactive attitudes
such as indignation and gratitude, and our systems of  punishment  and reward.
Often, such a conception of freedom is also tied to our  sense of  dignity,  indi-
viduality,  creativity,  hope,  and  love.2  Because  the  free  will  debate  is  inti-
mately connected to ordinary intuitions and beliefs via  these values and prac-
tices, it is important that a philosophical theory  of  free will  accounts for and
accords with  ordinary people’s understanding  of  the  concept  and  their  judg-
ments about  relevant cases. Minimally,  any theory of  freedom that  conflicts
with such intuitions should explain both why our intuitions are  mistaken  and
why we have those misleading intuitions in the first place.3

It is especially important for incompatibilists  that  their view is  supported
by ordinary intuitions for the following three reasons. First,  incompatibilism
about any two concepts is not the  default view.  As  William  Lycan explains,
“A theorist  who  maintains  of  something  that  is  not  obviously  impossible
that nonetheless that thing is impossible owes  us  an argument” (2003:  109).
Either determinism obviously precludes free will  or  those  who  maintain  that
it does should offer an explanation as to why it does. The philosophical con-
ception of determinism—i.e., that the laws of nature and state of  the  universe
at  one time  entail  the  state of  the  universe  at  later  times—has  no  obvious
conceptual or  logical  bearing on  human  freedom and  responsibility.  So,  by
claiming  that  determinism necessarily  precludes the  existence  of  free  will,
incompatibilists thereby assume the argumentative burden.4

3

                                                                                                        
2
See Kane (1996: ch. 6), as  well  as  Clarke  (2003:  ch.  6)  for  helpful  discussions  of  these
issues.
Though some compatibilists present their view as an error theory of this sort  or  as  a  revi-
sion  of  ordinary  conceptions  of  free  will,  most  follow  incompatibilists  in  claiming  that
their own theories of freedom and responsibility best  accord  with  ordinary  intuitions.  For
instance, Frankfurt cases (1969) are designed to pump the intuition that  the  freedom  nec-
essary for moral responsibility does not require the ability to do  otherwise.  See  also  Den-
nett (1984), Wolf (1990: 89), Lycan (2003), and Nowell-Smith (1949: 49).
See Warfield (2000) for an explanation of why the proper  incompatibilist  view  is  not  the
contingent  claim,  “If  determinism  is  true  then  there  is  no  freedom,”  but  the  stronger
claim,  “Necessarily,  if  determinism  is  true  then  there  is  no  freedom”  (169).  Arguably,
any claims about necessity  (impossibility)  are  more  contentious  than  claims  about  possi-

4

30    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

Second,  the  arguments  that  incompatibilists  provide  to  explain  why
determinism necessarily precludes  free  will  require  conceptions  of  free  will
that  are  more  metaphysically  demanding  than  compatibilist  alternatives.
These libertarian conceptions demand more of the  world in  order for free will
to  exist:  at  a minimum,  indeterministic  event-causal  processes  at  the  right
place in the  human  agent,  and often,  additionally, agent causation. To  point
out that incompatibilist theories are metaphysically demanding is  not  to  sug-
gest  that  they  are thereby less  likely  to  be true.  Rather,  it  is  simply  to  say
that these theories require more motivation  than  less  metaphysically demand-
ing ones.

Consider  an  example.  Suppose  two  philosophers—Hal  and  Dave—are
debating what it takes for something to be an action.  Hal claims  that  actions
are  events  caused  (in  the  right  sort  of  way)  by  beliefs  and  desires.  Dave
agrees, but  adds the  further condition that  the  token  beliefs  and  desires  that
cause an action cannot be identical to  anything  physical.  Now Dave, by  add-
ing this condition, does  not  thereby commit  himself  to  the  claim  that  token
beliefs and desires are not physical. But he does commit himself to the condi-
tional  claim  that  token  beliefs and desires are not  physical if there  are  any
actions. On our view, if T1 and T2 are both theories  of  x,  then  to  say  that  T1
is  more metaphysically demanding than  T2  is  to  say  that  T1  requires  more
metaphysical theses to be true than T2  does in order  for there  to be any x’s.
So,  Dave’s theory is  more metaphysically demanding than  Hal’s  because  it
requires  more  metaphysical  theses  to  be  true  in  order  for  there  to  be  any
actions.  Likewise,  incompatibilists—whether  libertarians  or  skeptics—have
more metaphysically demanding theories than  compatibilists  and  other  non-
incompatibilists (e.g., Double  1991,  1996) since they  say  that  special kinds
of causation (indeterministic or agent-causation) must obtain if there  are  any
free  actions.5

Given that, on Dave’s theory of  action the  existence of  actions is  incom-
patible with  the  token-identity of  mental  states,  his  theory will  be harder to
motivate  than  Hal’s,  which  does  not  require  extra  metaphysical  entities  in

                                                                                                        
bility. To illustrate, consider that quantifying  over  possible  worlds,  the  claim  “X  is  possi-
ble” is existential—there is at least one world where X  obtains—whereas  the  claim  “X  is
impossible” is universal—for all worlds, X fails to  obtain  (Lycan  2003).  See  also  Chalm-
ers (1996) who writes, “In general, a certain burden of proof lies on those who claim  that
a certain description  is  logically  impossible….  If  no  reasonable  analysis  of  the  terms  in
question points towards  a  contradiction,  or  even  makes  the  existence  of  a  contradiction
plausible, then there is a natural assumption in favor of logical possibility” (96).
Even though hard determinists or skeptics  about  free  will  are  not  committed  to  the  exis-
tence of libertarian free will, they are committed to the libertarian conception of free  will
since their arguments require this conception  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  free  will  does
not  (or  could  not)  exist.  Hence,  skeptics,  like  libertarians,  require  motivation  for  the
accuracy of this conception, and they often do so by suggesting that incompatibilism is  the
commonsensical or intuitive view (see, for instance, Strawson 1986 and Smilansky 2003).

5

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    31

       
       
order for actions to  be possible.6  Likewise,  since incompatibilist  theories of
free will  say  the  existence  of  free  will  is  incompatible  with  determinism,
these theories, other things being equal, will be harder to  motivate  than  com-
patibilist  theories,  which do not  require the  existence  of  extra  metaphysical
processes, such as indeterminism or agent causation, in  order for free actions
to  be  possible.  As  we’ve  seen,  many  incompatibilists  have  attempted  to
motivate  their metaphysically demanding theories,  at  least  in  part,  by  sug-
gesting that other things are not equal because our ordinary intuitions  support
incompatibilist views. This is not to say that incompatibilists must appeal  to
such  intuitions  in  order to  motivate  their demanding theories (see §§4.2-4.3
below). Nonetheless, it is certainly unclear why,  without  wide-scale intuitive
support  for  incompatibilism,  the  argumentative  burden  would  be  on  com-
patibilists,  as  suggested by  Kane above, and  by  Ekstrom  when  she  claims
that the compatibilist “needs a positive  argument in  favor of  the  compatibil-
ity thesis” (2000: 57).

Finally,  if it  were shown  that  people have intuitions  that  in  fact support
incompatibilism, it would  still  be open to  foes of  incompatibilism  to  argue
that, relative to ordinary conceptions of freedom and responsibility, their view
is  a benign  revision  towards a more metaphysically tenable theory.7  Incom-
patibilists,  on  the  other hand, do not  seem  to  have  this  move  available  to
them in the event that their view  is  inconsistent  with  prephilosophical intui-
tions. After all, it is difficult to  see why  philosophers  should revise the  con-
cept of free will to make it  more metaphysically demanding than  required by
ordinary intuitions  (see §4.3).8  So,  if  incompatibilism  is  not  the  intuitive
                                                                                                        
6
Of  course,  Dave  may  have  an  independent  argument  against  the  possibility  of  token-
identity, in which case his further incompatibility claim  becomes  somewhat  uninteresting.
But this would be akin to a philosopher having  an  independent  argument  against  the  pos-
sibility of determinism and then concluding that, necessarily,  if  we  have  free  will,  deter-
minism is  false—this  has,  prima  facie,  nothing  to  do  with  the  compatibility  question  and
everything to do with the validity of the inference from “~p” to “ (q ⊃ ~p).”  We  take
incompatibilism to be the statement of a thesis more substantial than this.
See Vargas  (2005).  Compatibilists  may  also  be  better  situated  to  offer  error  theories  to
explain why people sometimes express incompatibilist intuitions even though this  need  not
commit them to incompatibilist theories. See, for  instance,  Velleman  (2000)  and  Graham
and Horgan (1998).
There is a fourth reason that some  incompatibilists  should  want  their  view  to  be  intuitive
to ordinary people. Peter Strawson (1962) offered  a  compatibilist  argument  to  the  effect
that we cannot and should not attempt to provide metaphysical justifications  for  our  prac-
tices  of  moral  responsibility  (e.g.,  praise  and  blame),  which  are  grounded  in  reactive
attitudes  such  as  indignation  and  gratitude.  He  suggested  such  practices  are  subject  to
justifications and revisions based only on considerations internal  to  the  relevant  practices
and  attitudes,  but  not  on  considerations  external  to  the  practice,  including,  in  his  view,
determinism. But incompatibilists,  notably  Galen  Strawson,  have  responded  to  this  argu-
ment by suggesting that the question  of  determinism  is  not  external  to  our  considerations
of  moral  responsibility  (see  also  Pereboom  2001).  That  is,  they  claim  that  our  reactive
attitudes themselves are sensitive to whether human  actions  are  deterministically  caused.
As Galen Strawson puts it, the fact  that  “the  basic  incompatibilist  intuition  that  determin-

7

8

32    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

view, or if no  premises that  support  incompatibilist  conclusions  are particu-
larly  intuitive,  then  there  seems  to  be  little  motivation  for  advancing  an
incompatibilist theory of free will.

This  is  not  to  suggest  that  compatibilist,  or  other  non-incompatibilist
(see §4.2.3),  theories are correct,  nor  is  it  to  suggest  that  incompatibilist
theories are incorrect—these  claims  go  far beyond the  scope of  the  present
essay.  We have simply  set  out  to  show  why  it  makes sense for  incompati-
bilists  to  claim  that  most  people share  their  intuitions  about  free  will  and
determinism. On  the  one hand, by  aligning  their  view  with  commonsense,
they thereby place the burden of proof on their opponents. On the  other hand,
by assuming that their theories are the most  intuitive,  they  are able to  moti-
vate their metaphysically demanding conception of  free will.  This  last  point
is  particularly important,  for if  it  turns  out  that  incompatibilist  theories are
not  nearly  as  intuitive  as  incompatibilists  themselves  commonly  assume,
then it becomes increasingly difficult to see why we should adopt these theo-
ries.  However, so  long  as  incompatibilists  are allowed to  assume that  their
theories best  accord with  and account for ordinary intuitions,  they  may  also
assume that they do not need to offer much by way of motivating their view.
But what evidence are incompatibilists  relying on  when  they  talk  about
the wide-scale intuitive plausibility of their theories? Usually,  it  is  the  same
evidence philosophers typically  give  when they  claim  some  idea is  intuitive
(or commonsensical or obvious)—namely, that it is intuitive to them.  Unfor-
tunately, because philosophers on differing sides of  the  debate disagree about
the compatibility question and the proper analysis  of ‘free will,’  they  tend to
disagree about the intuitive  plausibility  of  many  of  the  more basic premises
or thought experiments that  drive the  debate as  well—for instance,  the  effec-
tiveness of  Frankfurt cases, the  analysis  of  ‘could have done otherwise,’ and
the validity of inference rules employed in incompatibilist arguments, such as
Peter van Inwagen’s rule ‘Beta’ (1983).  As  a result,  these philosophers  find
themselves at various argumentative impasses, often grounded in a conflict of
intuitions.9
                                                                                                        
ism  is  incompatible  with  freedom  …  has  such  power  for  us  is  as  much  a  natural  fact
about cogitative beings like ourselves as is the fact  of  our  quite  unreflective  commitment
to the reactive attitudes. What is more, the roots of the incompatibilist  intuition  lie  deep  in
the very reactive attitudes that are invoked in order  to  undercut  it.  The  reactive  attitudes
enshrine  the  incompatibilist  intuition”  (1986:  88).  If  it  turned  out  that  this  claim  is
false—that most people’s reactive  attitudes  are  not  in  fact  sensitive  to  considerations  of
determinism—then this  particular  incompatibilist  response  to  the  elder  Strawson’s  argu-
ment would fail. While there are other responses to Peter  Strawson’s  views,  we  interpret
some of the claims  that  incompatibilism  is  intuitive  as  attempts  to  shore  up  this  response
that our ordinary reactive attitudes and attributions of moral responsibility  are  sensitive  to
determinism.  And  we  accordingly  view  any  evidence  to  the  contrary  as  strengthening
Peter Strawson’s suggestion that determinism  is  irrelevant  to  debates  about  freedom  and
responsibility and, accordingly, as weakening incompatibilism.
See Fischer (1994) on what he calls “Dialectical Stalemates.”

9

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    33

       
       

Given this stalemate  of  philosophical intuitions  concerning free will  and
determinism, it is  not  surprising  that  philosophers  often back up  their posi-
tion with appeals  to  prephilosophical intuitions.  But since philosophers  on
both sides of the debate generally claim that their own intuitions are the  natu-
ral,  commonsensical ones,  these opposing  claims  end  in  yet  another  stale-
mate.  It  would help,  therefore, to  know  which position  in  fact  accords  best
with  the  intuitions  of  philosophical  laypersons who  have  not  been  signifi-
cantly influenced by the relevant philosophical theories and arguments.

2. How to determine whether incompatibilism is intuitive

Whether or not incompatibilism is  intuitive  to  the  majority  of  laypersons is
a largely empirical question that we will examine accordingly. Here we depart
from  a  standard  philosophical  methodology,  whereby  philosophers  consult
their  own intuitions  from the  armchair and assume that  they  represent  ordi-
nary  intuitions.  While  this  practice  may  be  appropriate  when  such  an
assumption  is  uncontroversial, it  does not  shed much  light  on  the  free  will
debate because, as we’ve suggested, philosophers  have conflicting intuitions,
intuitions  that  may  well  have been  influenced  by  their  own  well-developed
theories. So, we suggest that the free will debate calls for the  kind of  empiri-
cal research on  ‘folk intuitions’  that  has  recently  been  carried  out  in  other
areas  of  philosophy—for  instance,  action  theory  (e.g.,  Nadelhoffer  2004,
2005; Knobe 2003, 2004), epistemology (e.g., Nichols,  Weinberg, and Stich
2002),  and ethics (e.g.,  Doris  and Stich  forthcoming).  This  type  of  research
has  produced  some  surprising  and  important  results  about  what  ordinary
people’s intuitions actually are. And given that  such  intuitions  often play  an
important  role in  debates about  freedom and  responsibility,  we  believe  that
applying the same empirically informed methodology to these debates will  be
equally  illuminating  (see  Nahmias,  Morris,  Nadelhoffer,  and  Turner  2004,
2005; Nichols 2004).

It is  important  to  keep in  mind that  we are not  suggesting  that  any phi-
losophical  theory  would  be  demonstrably  confirmed  (or  disconfirmed)  just
because it aligns  with  (or conflicts with)  folk  intuitions  and practices. After
all, such intuitions and practices may be mistaken  or contradictory and hence
in need of  elimination  or  revision.  (Of course, to  know  the  extent to  which
they  need to  be eliminated or  revised, we must  first  know  what these intui-
tions  and practices actually are.) Nonetheless, on  our  view,  a theory  of  free
will that accords with those intuitions relevant to  things  we care about,  such
as ascriptions of moral responsibility,  has,  all  else being  equal, a theoretical
advantage over a theory that  demands revision  or  elimination  of  such  intui-
tions. Though the nature of intuitions  and their role in  philosophical  debates
is  controversial (see DePaul and Ramsey,  1998),  many  philosophers  accept
that,  at  a  minimum,  a  theory  that  conflicts  with  widely  shared  intuitions

34    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

takes on  a cost  that  must  be offset by  other theoretical advantages,  while  a
theory that accords with relevant intuitive judgments has “squatter’s rights.”10
Therefore, we believe that  it  is  important  to  know  what these  intuitions
actually are and that empirical research will  sometimes  be necessary to  ascer-
tain  the  answer. In  this  respect,  we  agree  with  Frank  Jackson’s  claim  that
philosophers analyzing the concept of free will should “appeal to  what seems
most  obvious  and central about  free action [and] determinism …  as  revealed
by our intuitions about possible cases” (1998: 31), and we follow  through  on
his  suggestion  that  one should  conduct  “serious  opinion  polls  on  people’s
responses to  various cases  …  when  it  is  necessary”  (36-37).11  While  such
systematic  studies  may  ultimately  be  work  best  left  to  psychologists  and
sociologists, philosophers are well situated to lay out the  philosophical  prob-
lems  and  to  develop  scenarios  that  probe  the  intuitions  relevant  to  them.
Moreover, in the event that psychologists  and sociologists  have not  yet  gen-
erated  the  data  that  philosophers  need—as  is  the  case  with  the  free  will
debate—philosophers should not  shy  away from getting  their hands dirty by
trying  to  test  folk  intuitions  themselves in  a systematic  way,  even  if  their
results will be merely preliminary. Having said this, we  should now  examine
the  results  of  our  own  attempts  to  probe  laypersons’  intuitions  about  free
will and responsibility—with an eye towards ascertaining whether incompati-
bilism really is intuitive.

3. Testing whether incompatibilism is intuitive

It is difficult to know what  philosophers  have in  mind when they  claim  that
ordinary people start out as  “natural incompatibilists.”  For  our  purposes,  we
take intuitions to be propensities to  make certain non-deductive, spontaneous
judgments about, for instance, whether or not a particular concept applies in a
particular situation.12 So,  one way to  read the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is
intuitive  is  as  a prediction  about  the  judgments laypersons would  make  in
response  to  relevant  thought  experiments.  Consider  Kane’s  assertion  that
“ordinary persons …  believe there is  some  kind of  conflict between freedom
and determinism”  (Kane  1999:  217).13  This  suggests  the  following  predic-
tion:

11

                                                                                                        
10
See Graham and Horgan (1998: 273). We will not be developing a defense of  the  role  of
intuitions in philosophical debates  (though  see  §4.3),  since  our  main  target  is  incompati-
bilists who claim they  have  the  support  of  ordinary  intuitions  and  hence  seem  to  accept
that intuitions play some significant role in the debate.
See also Stich and Weinberg (2001),  and  Graham  and  Horgan  (1998),  who  write,  “phi-
losophy  should  regard  armchair-obtainable  data  about  ideological  [i.e.,  conceptual]
questions as empirical, and hence defeasible” (277).
See Goldman and Pust (1998: 182) and Jackson (1998).
Or Pink’s assertion that “the intuition that  Incompatibilism  is  true  …  is  very  general.  For
most people who are new to philosophy, nothing else makes sense” (2004: 14).

12
13

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    35

       
       

(P) When  presented  with  a  deterministic  scenario,  most  people  will
judge that agents in such a scenario do not act of  their own  free will
and are not morally responsible for their actions.

To see that (P) is a fair way of reading incompatibilist  claims  about  people’s
intuitions,  consider  J.A.  Cover  and  John  O’Leary-Hawthorne’s  charge  that
any suggestion that  “compatibilism  does full  justice  to  our  ordinary concep-
tion of freedom ... is  at  best  poor  anthropology” (1996:  50).  Their supposed
anthropological “evidence” to the contrary consists of the assertion that:

When ordinary people come to consciously recognize and understand that  some  action  is  con-
tingent upon circumstances in an agent’s past that are beyond that agent’s control,  they  quickly
lose  a  propensity  to  impute  moral  responsibility  to  the  agent  for  that  action.  We  can  readily
explain this fact by supposing that ordinary people have a conception of  freedom,  agency,  and
moral responsibility according to which an action is free and  accountable  only  if  that  action  is
not  fully  determined  by  circumstances,  past  or  present,  that  are  beyond  the  agent’s  control.
(50-51)14

We  suggest  that  incompatibilists  making  these  sorts  of  claims  about  the
intuitions  and beliefs of  ordinary people are tacitly  committed to  something
along the lines of (P). And since (P) is  an empirically testable prediction, we
tested it.

We surveyed people who  had not  studied the  free will  debate. In  our  first
study, participants read the  following  scenario, drawn from a Laplacean con-
ception of determinism:

Imagine  that  in  the  next  century  we  discover  all  the  laws  of  nature,  and  we  build  a
supercomputer  which  can  deduce  from  these  laws  of  nature  and  from  the  current  state  of
everything in the world exactly what will be happening in  the  world  at  any  future  time.  It  can
look at everything about the way the world is and predict  everything  about  how  it  will  be  with
100%  accuracy.  Suppose  that  such  a  supercomputer  existed,  and  it  looks  at  the  state  of  the
universe at a certain time on March 25th, 2150 A.D., twenty years  before  Jeremy  Hall  is  born.
The computer then deduces from this information and the laws of nature that  Jeremy  will  defi-
nitely  rob  Fidelity  Bank  at  6:00  PM  on  January  26th,  2195.  As  always,  the  supercomputer’s
prediction is correct; Jeremy robs Fidelity Bank at 6:00 PM on January 26th, 2195.

                                                                                                        
14
Cover and Hawthorne draw this conclusion in part from discussions  with  their  philosophy
students (1996: 51). Similarly, Derk Pereboom writes, “Beginning students typically  recoil
at  the  compatibilist  response  to  the  problem  of  moral  responsibility”  (2001:  xvi),  and
Timothy  O’Connor  writes,  “Does  freedom  of  choice  have  this  implication  [that  causal
determinism must be false]? It seems so  to  the  typical  undergraduate  on  first  encounter-
ing the question” (2000: 4). We suspect that such responses  from  students  are  influenced
by  the  way  the  problem  is  presented  to  them,  and  we  have  our  own  unscientific  “evi-
dence” indicating that a compatibilist teacher  can  present  the  issue  so  that  most  students
don’t see a problem with determinism  and  raise  their  hands  in  support  of  a  compatibilist
conception of free  will.  Thus,  we  suggest  surveying  people  who  have  not  yet  been  ex-
posed  to  the  relevant  philosophical  arguments  (and  our  own  methodology  follows  this
suggestion—see below).

36    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

Participants were asked to  imagine  that  such  a scenario were actual and then
asked: “Do you  think  that,  when Jeremy robs  the  bank,  he acts of  his  own
free will?” A  significant  majority  (76%)  of  participants  judged  that  Jeremy
does act of his  own  free will.15  One might  worry that  people are inclined to
overlook mitigating factors when judging the freedom or  responsibility  of  an
agent who has performed an action they deem immoral. To test  for the  possi-
bility  that  participants were influenced by  the  negative nature of  the  action,
we replaced Jeremy’s robbing the bank with a positive action (saving a child)
for another set of participants and a neutral action (going  jogging)  for a third
set. Changing the nature of the action had no  significant  effect on  responses:
68% judged that Jeremy saves the child of his own  free will,  and 79%  judged
that  he goes  jogging  of  his  own  free will.  We also  asked additional  sets  of
participants directly about moral responsibility: 83% responded that Jeremy is
“morally blameworthy for robbing the  bank,” and 88%  responded that  “he is
morally praiseworthy for saving the child.”

Notice that we did not actually use the term ‘determinism’ in  the  scenario.
This is in part because in prior  surveys we found that  most  people either did
not know what ‘determinism’ meant or  they  thought  it  meant,  basically,  the
opposite of free will.  If people have internalized the  philosophical  label “the
problem of free will and determinism” and come to  understand ‘determinism’
to mean the opposite of free  will,  that  would count  as  support  for the  claim
that incompatibilism is intuitive only at the cost  of  making  incompatibilism
an  empty  tautology.  Rather,  the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is  intuitive
should amount to the claim that ordinary intuitions about  free will  and moral
responsibility  indicate  a  conflict  with  the  philosophical  conception  of
‘determinism’—and it  is  irrelevant to  this  claim  how  laypersons  happen  to
use  the  term  ‘determinism.’  Hence,  our  goal  was  to  describe  determinism,
roughly  in  the  philosophical  sense of  the  concept, without  presenting deter-
minism  in  a question-begging way as  explicitly  involving  constraint,  fatal-
ism,  reductionism,  etc.16  Of  course,  to  test  prediction  (P),  determinism
should be  as  salient  to  participants  as  possible  without  being  misleading.

16

                                                                                                        
15
For  a  complete  description  of  this  and  other  studies,  including  methodology,  statistical
significance, and various objections and replies, see Nahmias et al.  (2005).  For  all  of  the
studies,  participants  were  students  at  Florida  State  University  who  had  never  taken  a
college philosophy course.
This is not to suggest that there  is  a  univocal  understanding  of  the  philosophical  concep-
tion of determinism  (see,  e.g.,  Earman  2004).  However,  incompatibilists  tend  to  use  the
description of determinism offered by van  Inwagen  (1983:  65):  a  proposition  expressing
the state of the world at any instant conjoined with the laws of nature  entails  any  proposi-
tion expressing the state of the universe  at  any  other  time.  There  are  also  debates  about
how to understand the laws of nature; see Beebee and Mele (2002) for an  interesting  dis-
cussion  of  the  relationship  between  Humean  conceptions  of  laws  and  the  compatibility
question.

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    37

       
       
With this in mind, we  developed a second scenario using  a simpler,  and per-
haps more salient, presentation of determinism:

Imagine  there  is  a  universe  that  is  re-created  over  and  over  again,  starting  from  the  exact
same initial conditions and with  all  the  same  laws  of  nature.  In  this  universe  the  same  condi-
tions and the same laws of nature produce the exact  same  outcomes,  so  that  every  single  time
the universe is  re-created,  everything  must  happen  the  exact  same  way.  For  instance,  in  this
universe a person named Jill  decides  to  steal  a  necklace  at  a  particular  time,  and  every  time
the universe is re-created, Jill decides to steal the necklace at that time.17

The results  were similar  to  those  above.  In  this  case  the  participants  were
asked both to judge whether Jill decided to  steal the  necklace of  her own  free
will  and whether “it  would be fair to  hold her morally  responsible  (that  is,
blame her) for her decision to  steal the  necklace.”18  Most  participants offered
consistent judgments; overall, 66% judged that Jill acted of her own free will,
and 77% judged her to be morally responsible.

Finally,  we developed a scenario meant to  make salient  the  fact  that  the
agents’ actions were deterministically caused by  factors outside their  control
(their genes and upbringing):

Imagine there is a world where the beliefs and values  of  every  person  are  caused  completely
by the combination of one’s genes and one’s environment. For instance,  one  day  in  this  world,
two identical twins, named Fred and Barney, are born to a mother who  puts  them  up  for  adop-
tion. Fred is adopted by the Jerksons and Barney is adopted by  the  Kindersons.  In  Fred’s  case,
his  genes  and  his  upbringing  by  the  selfish  Jerkson  family  have  caused  him  to  value  money
above all else and to believe it is OK to acquire money however you can. In Barney’s case,  his
(identical) genes and his upbringing by the kindly  Kinderson  family  have  caused  him  to  value
honesty above  all  else  and  to  believe  one  should  always  respect  others’  property.  Both  Fred
and Barney are intelligent individuals who are capable of deliberating about what they do.

One day Fred and Barney each happen to find a wallet containing $1000  and  the  identification
of the owner (neither man knows  the  owner).  Each  man  is  sure  there  is  nobody  else  around.
After  deliberation,  Fred  Jerkson,  because  of  his  beliefs  and  values,  keeps  the  money.  After
deliberation,  Barney  Kinderson,  because  of  his  beliefs  and  values,  returns  the  wallet  to  its
owner.

Given  that,  in  this  world,  one’s  genes  and  environment  completely  cause  one’s  beliefs  and
values,  it  is  true  that  if  Fred  had  been  adopted  by  the  Kindersons,  he  would  have  had  the
                                                                                                        
17  We  should  point  out  that  in  this  survey  and  all  others,  participants  were  instructed  to
reason conditionally from the assumption that  the  scenario  is  actual.  For  instance,  in  this
one,  we  wrote:  “In  answering  the  following  questions,  assume  that  this  scenario  is  an
accurate  description  of  the  universe  in  which  Jill  steals  the  necklace  (regardless  of
whether you think it might be  an  accurate  description  of  the  way  our  universe  works).”
We also used manipulation checks on the back  of  the  surveys  to  ensure  that  participants
understood the  nature  of  the  scenario  and  excluded  those  who  missed  the  manipulation
check. For instance, in this study participants were excluded if they responded ‘no’  to  the
question: “According to the scenario, is it accurate to  say  that  every  time  the  universe  is
re-created, Jill makes the same decision?”
Questions were counterbalanced for order effects and none were found.

18

38    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

beliefs and  values  that  would  have  caused  him  to  return  the  wallet;  and  if  Barney  had  been
adopted by the Jerksons, he would have had the beliefs and values that would have  caused  him
to keep the wallet.

Judgments about free will were consistent with the results in the other scenar-
ios: 76% of the participants judged both that Fred kept  the  wallet of  his  own
free will  and that  Barney returned it  of  his  own  free will.  A  different  set  of
participants answered questions about moral responsibility, with 60% judging
that  Fred is  morally  blameworthy  for  keeping  the  wallet  and  64%  judging
that Barney is morally praiseworthy for returning it.

Table 1: Summary of Results

Subjects’
judgments that
the agents…

…acted of their
own free will

…are
morally responsible
for their action

Scenario 1
(Jeremy)

Scenario 2

(Jill)

Scenario 3

(Fred & Barney)

76% (robbing bank)
68% (saving child)
79% (going jogging)

83% (robbing bank)
88% (saving child)

66%

77%

76% (stealing)
76% (returning)

60% (stealing)
64% (returning)

The  results  from  these  three  studies  offer  considerable  evidence  for  the
falsity  of  the  incompatibilist  prediction  (P)—i.e.,  the  prediction  that  most
ordinary people would judge that agents in a deterministic scenario do not  act
of their  own  free will  and are not  morally  responsible.  Instead, a significant
majority of our  participants judged that  such  agents are  free and responsible
for their actions.19  If (P)  represents the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is  intui-
tive, then pending evidence to the contrary, incompatibilism  is  not  intuitive.
Obviously,  these  results  do  not  thereby  falsify  incompatibilism.  But  they
certainly  raise  a  significant  challenge  for  the  common  claim  that  ordinary
people start out with incompatibilist intuitions and that,  hence, the  burden is
on  compatibilists  to  defend theories purported to  be significant  revisions  of
ordinary beliefs and practices. Rather, given this preliminary data, we suggest
the  burden  is  on  incompatibilists  to  motivate  a  theory  of  free  will  that
appears  to  be  more  metaphysically  demanding  than  ordinary  intuitions
demand.

                                                                                                        
19 We  recognize  that  participants  may  be  employing  various  conceptions  of  moral
responsibility  in  answering  our  questions.  It  would  be  helpful  to  run  systematic  tests  on
what  conception  people  have  in  mind.  On  some  pilot  studies,  we  asked  participants
whether the agents in the scenarios deserved reward or punishment for  their  actions,  and
results were consistent with those reported above.

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    39

       
       

4. Objections, replies, and implications

We  will  now  examine  several  moves  incompatibilists  might  make  in
response to our approach: (1) garner empirical evidence in  support  of  (P)  that
outweighs our evidence against it; (2) replace (P) with some  other description
of  what it  means to  say  that  incompatibilism  is  intuitive  and  demonstrate
that this alternative principle is  supported by  ordinary intuitions;  or  (3) give
up  the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is  intuitive  and argue  that  this  does  not
affect the strength of the incompatibilist position.

4.1 Generate empirical evidence in support of (P)
There are various methodological objections  one might  advance  against  our
studies, and we address some  of  them  elsewhere.20  As  mentioned above, one
significant worry is that in  order to  test  (P)  the  scenario must  describe deter-
minism in a way that is salient to the participants.  Otherwise, many  of  them
might  fail  to  recognize the  supposed threat to  free will  and  responsibility.21
We agree that the more salient determinism is in the  scenarios, the  more sig-
nificant  the  results  are.  However,  the  descriptions  of  determinism  cannot
require untrained participants to  understand the  more  technical  aspects  (e.g.,
modal  operators)  of  the  philosophical  definitions  of  determinism.  Nor  can
they describe determinism in ways that may mask  any effects of  determinism
itself.  For  instance,  suppose  that  a  scenario  illustrated  determinism  by
involving a covert  manipulator (e.g.,  a nefarious neurosurgeon) who  ensures
that an agent acts in  a certain way,  and suppose  (as seems likely)  that  most
people judge that the agent is not free or responsible. Would these judgments
be issuing from an intuition  that  determinism undermines free will,  or  from
an intuition that an agent’s action  is  unfree if  it  is  traceable to  manipulation
by  another  agent?  Such  judgments  may  be  the  result  of  freedom-defeating
aspects of  the  case  that  are  distinct  from  determinism.22  Likewise,  descrip-
tions of determinism  stating  that  the  laws  of  nature constrain or  compel us,
that our actions are fated, or that our conscious deliberations are epiphenome-
nal  are liable  to  generate negative judgments about  freedom and responsibil-
ity, but  such  judgments would not  help  settle  questions about  the  intuitive-
ness  of  incompatibilism—i.e.,  the  view  that  the  ordinary  concepts  of  free
will and moral responsibility are incompatible with the philosophical concept
of  determinism. Part  of  what we are trying  to  discover is  whether unprimed
subjects are prone to treat this concept of determinism as relevantly similar to
                                                                                                        
20
21
22

See Nahmias et al. (2005).
See Black and Tweedale (2002).
One could test which aspect of such cases drives  negative  judgments  about  freedom  and
responsibility by seeing if parallel manipulation scenarios that  involve  indeterminism  gar-
ner similarly negative judgments. If so, it would suggest that it  is  manipulation  rather  than
determinism  that  is  causing  the  judgments  that  the  agent  is  not  free  or  responsible.  See
Mele’s (2005) response to Pereboom’s “generalization strategy” (2001: ch. 4).

40    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

constraint, compulsion, epiphenomenalism,  or  fate; to  simply  come out  and
tell them, in the scenarios, that such similarities hold is  to  undermine one of
the goals of such studies.23

If one is able to find a way to increase the salience of determinism without
inadvertently  introducing  a  different  threat  to  free  will,  we  welcome  the
attempt.  If  turning  up  the  volume  on  the  ‘determinism  knob’  does  cause
people to  withdraw judgments of  free  will  and  moral  responsibility  (and  if
this  is  clearly  not  a  result  of  factors  extraneous  to  determinism),  then  we
would withdraw our  current interpretation of  the  data.  If  such  cases  do  not
result in most people judging the agents to be  unfree and unresponsible,  then
our interpretation is strengthened. As it stands, an incompatibilist  who  wants
to show that our tests of prediction (P)  are problematic (for this  or  other rea-
sons) needs to  offer alternative ways to  test  people’s intuitions  without  pre-
senting determinism in a questionable way.

4.2 (P) does not capture the content of the claim that
incompatibilism is intuitive
A more promising  response for the  incompatibilist  to  make is  that  (P)  does
not accurately represent what it means to claim that incompatibilism is  intui-
tive. One might  argue that  most  people will  not  in  fact recognize a conflict
between determinism and freedom or  responsibility,  but  will  only  come  to
see such a conflict once they  understand the  implications  of  determinism. Of
course, “getting people to  see these implications”  is  probably going  to  be a
euphemism  for “giving  them  a philosophical  argument,” and  an  incompati-
bilist one at that. These arguments will involve  premises that  are themselves
controversial  and  also  appeal  to  intuitions—for  instance,  about  whether
determinism  conflicts  with  our  ordinary  conception  of  ‘the  ability  to  do
otherwise.’24 If  it  takes an argument to  make incompatibilism  the  “intuitive
view,” then it seems Kane has  it  backwards when he says,  “ordinary persons
have to  be talked out  of  [their] natural incompatibilism  by  the  clever  argu-
ments of philosophers” (1999: 218). Rather,  it  is  the  incompatibilist  who  is

                                                                                                        
23
Indeed, it seems that determinism has sometimes been conflated with other theses that  are
threatening to the ordinary conception of the sort of free  will  required  for  moral  respon-
sibility—theses that are neither entailed by, nor entail, determinism,  such  as  predictability
in  practice  (not  just  in  theory),  certain  scientific  accounts  of  human  behavior,  or  any
reductionist  theories  of  mind  that  imply  conscious  deliberations  are  epiphenomenal.  As
with the example in the prior note,  it  would  be  useful  to  follow  up  our  studies  with  ones
that describe these theses in a way understandable  to  the  folk.  If  their  responses  suggest
that  they  see  these  theses  as  threats  to  free  will,  then,  given  our  results  regarding  folk
judgments about determinism, we would have reason to believe  that  it  is  not  the  thesis  of
determinism per se that threatens people’s ordinary notion of free  will,  but  instead  theses
that are mistakenly conflated with determinism.
See Nahmias et al. (2005) for results regarding participants’  judgments  about  the  agents’
ability to do otherwise in deterministic scenarios.

24

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    41

       
       
talking  ordinary  people  into  incompatibilism—or,  at  least,  compatibilist
philosophers are not talking them out of anything.25 In any  case, our  primary
target is  represented by  the  incompatibilists  who  claim  that  ordinary  people
begin  with  the  intuition  that  determinism  precludes  free  will  and  moral
responsibility. To the  extent that  our  arguments and data force them  to  give
up  this  claim  and  replace  it  with  one  of  the  alternatives  we  will  outline
below, we will have succeeded. To the extent that we also  encourage philoso-
phers on all sides of the  free will  debate to  evaluate the  role of  intuitions  in
the debate and to consider the importance of  gaining  an empirical understand-
ing  of  ordinary intuitions  about  free will  and moral  responsibility,  we  will
also have achieved one of our aims.

4.2.1 Libertarian intuitions lead to incompatibilism
Nonetheless, one route the incompatibilist might take is  to  argue that  people
have  an  intuitive  conception  of  the  sort  of  freedom  necessary  for  moral
responsibility that is in fact incompatible with determinism, but  most  people
recognize this incompatibility only with some explanation. In other  words, it
is not that incompatibilism is intuitive and this suggests a libertarian  concep-
tion of freedom; rather, the libertarian conception of  freedom is  intuitive,  and
the contours of this conception support premises in a  philosophical  argument
for an incompatibilist conclusion. Instead of (P), such incompatibilists  might
advance:

(L) Most  people’s  intuitions  about  freedom  and  responsibility  corre-
spond to the  libertarian conception—one that  requires the  ability  to
do otherwise in  the  exact  same  conditions  and  perhaps  something
like agent causal powers—and whether people realize it  or  not,  such
a conception is incompatible with determinism.

This claim marks a significant response to our tests of (P) in that  it  opens
up  the  possibility  that  our  participants were simply  unable to  recognize the
conflict between  their  conception  of  free  will  and  the  deterministic  scenar-
ios.26  However, establishing  (L) requires  evidence—e.g.  against  those  com-

                                                                                                        
25
To  test  the  influence  of  exposure  to  the  philosophical  arguments,  we  ran  the  Fred  and
Barney survey on a class of Intro students soon after a two-week section  on  the  free  will
debate.  The  results,  it  turned  out,  were  not  significantly  different  from  the  results  gar-
nered  from  ‘untrained’  participants:  83%  of  the  ‘trained’  participants  judged  that  Fred
and Barney acted of their own free will, where  76%  of  untrained  participants  had  made
such judgments.
One might point out that our studies consistently  found  a  minority  of  participants  (usually
20-30%)  who  offered  incompatibilist  responses  and  argue  that  these  subjects  “got  it”
while the majority were unable to  recognize  the  connection  between  the  determinism  in
the scenario and their own conception of freedom  and  responsibility.  Perhaps  some  peo-
ple were motivated not to recognize such a conflict because they are strongly  attached  to

26

42    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

patibilists who claim the  ordinary conception of  free will  is  not  the  libertar-
ian one (see note 3)—that laypersons in  fact have a libertarian conception of
free will, and one robust enough to  require indeterminism (and perhaps agent
causation). Such a claim will  require empirical data sufficient to  counter, for
instance, our finding that  most  people consider an agent to  be free and mor-
ally responsible in a deterministic setting.27

One way that incompatibilists have  argued for the  claim  that  people have
a libertarian conception of  freedom  appeals  to  the  phenomenology  of  deci-
sion-making  and  action.  They  suggest  that  we  experience  the  ability  to
choose  otherwise  associated  with  free  will  in  an  unconditional  sense  that
commits us to a belief in  indeterminism and perhaps also  that  we experience
ourselves as  agent causes of  our  actions.28  No  one  suggests  that  this  phe-
nomenology  establishes  the  existence  of  libertarian  freedom,  but  they  do
suggest  that  it  demonstrates a widespread  belief  in  libertarian  freedom  such
that, without  it,  free will  would be an illusion.29  However, we believe such
appeals to phenomenology are controversial, supported only by  philosophers’
own  theory-laden  introspective  reports  but  unsupported  by  any  relevant
research on the phenomenology of non-philosophers.30  It  seems unlikely  that
our  phenomenology of  deliberation and action  is  rich  or  precise  enough  to
entail  a tacit  commitment  to  the  falsity  of  a theoretical view such  as  deter-
minism.

4.2.2 More basic intuitions lead to incompatibilism
Another  approach  is  for  the  incompatibilist  to  present  an  argument  with
premises that appeal to what might  be considered more basic  intuitions  than
those we have been discussing. Consider, for example, van Inwagen’s famous

                                                                                                        
the idea that we are free and responsible and are thus inclined to avoid any  cognitive  dis-
sonance involved in considering a possible threat to our own  freedom.  For  instance,  peo-
ple’s propensity to blame others for bad outcomes may skew some of their responses.  W e
consider  these  issues  more  fully  in  Nahmias  et  al.  (2005);  see  also  Nichols  and  Knobe
(forthcoming).
See Nichols (2004). He  takes  his  results  to  suggest  that  both  children  and  adults  have  a
conception  of  agent  causation.  We  appreciate  Nichols  empirical  approach  to  these
issues, but we do not think  his  results  support  the  conclusion  that  people’s  intuitions  sug-
gest agent causation (see Turner and Nahmias, 2006).
Note, however, that a phenomenological commitment to agent  causation  alone  would  not
be enough to support (L): one  can  believe  in  agent-causation  and  still  be  a  compatibilist
(see  Markosian  1999).  On  the  phenomenology  of  choice  and  action,  see  also  Horgan,
Tienson, and Graham (2003).
See, e.g., Clarke (2003: ch. 6) and van Inwagen (1983: ch. V).
See Nahmias et al. (2004).

29
30

27

28

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    43

       
       
Consequence argument  (1983:  ch.  3).31  One  version  of  the  argument  goes
like this:

(1)

If determinism is  true,  then  the  past  and the  laws  of  nature strictly
imply every truth about the future.

(2) We have no choice about  the  past  and we have no  choice about  the

(3)

laws of nature.
If we have no choice about A and we have no choice about  B,  and A
& B strictly imply C, then we have no choice about C.

(4) Therefore, if determinism is true, we have no choice about  any truth

about the future (including any truth about what actions we take).

Given a few innocent assumptions about  substituting  in  to  premise (3),  this
argument is deductively valid. A  proponent of  it  will  be concerned to  defend
premise (2) and premise  (3),  the  ‘Transfer  principle.’  (The  first  premise  is
taken to be true by definition.)32

Suppose a philosopher—call her Liv—were to defend premises (2) and (3)
by claiming  that  they  are supported by  pretheoretical intuitions.  When faced
with our results, Liv may respond as follows:

Sure, you can get  people  to  call  deterministically  caused  actions  free.  But  people  have  other
intuitions  too—intuitions  that  nobody  has  a  choice  about  the  past  or  the  laws  of  nature,  and
intuitions that support the Transfer principle—and  these  intuitions  entail  incompatibilism.  Your
questions have a very broad scope—they were about  free  will  and  responsibility  directly,  and
at  the  level  of  free  will  and  responsibility.  The  intuitions  supporting  my  premises  are  more
basic—they  are  about  the  conceptual  components  of  free  will  and  responsibility,  as  it
were—about  choice  or  control  and  how  they  work.  People  may  call  Jeremy  or  Jill  free  and
responsible, but they are mistaken, for they fail to take into account their own  more  basic  intui-
tions about choice or control.

Liv,  in  essence,  is  arguing  that  the  correct  way  to  understand  “incompati-
bilism is intuitive” is as the claim:

(C) Most  people  have  intuitions  about  a  concept  C  (e.g.,  ‘choice’  or
‘control’), which is  distinct from the  concept of  free will  but  is  an
essential component of it, and these intuitions entail that free will  is
incompatible with determinism.

32

                                                                                                        
31
The version below is drawn from Warfield (2000: 168). In  van  Inwagen’s  argument,  the
Transfer principle that corresponds to premise  (3)  is  treated  as  an  inference  rule  called
‘Beta.’
The incompatibilist will also have  to  establish  that  the  concept  of  choice  involved  in  the
conclusion is in fact the one relevant  to  our  interest  in  freedom  and  responsibility.  Some
have  challenged  this  claim,  suggesting  that  we  can  be  morally  responsible  even  if  we
cannot  choose  otherwise  in  the  sense  entailed  by  the  Consequence  argument  (see,  for
instance, Fischer 1994). See discussion in text below.

44    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

Since  our  studies  do  not  directly 
investigate  claims  about  C-intui-
tions—intuitions that are  supposed to  underwrite premises (2) and (3) of  the
Consequence  argument—Liv  can  insist  that  our  results  are  irrelevant  to
whether or not incompatibilism  is  intuitive  in  the  relevant  sense: the  sense
involved in (C).

It  is  true that  our  surveys do not  directly consider C-intuitions.  However
our  results  do offer some indirect  evidence against the  intuitive  plausibility
of  the  Consequence argument.  Our scenarios  present  conditions  in  the  past
that,  along  with  the  laws  of  nature, are sufficient conditions for the  agent’s
action. So, the fact that most participants judged that the  agent in  the  scenar-
ios is free and responsible seems to suggest either (a) that they have the intui-
tion  that  the  Transfer  principle  does  not  apply  to  free  choices,  or  (b)
that—regardless of the soundness of  the  Consequence argument—the concept
of  choice the  argument  invokes  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  “we  have  no
choice about  any truth  about  the  future,”  does  not  accord  with  the  concept
ordinary people consider relevant to  free  will  and  moral  responsibility.33  In
any case, if  empirical data is  relevant to  the  broad-scope  claim  that  incom-
patibilism is  the  pretheoretically intuitive  position,  then  similar  data should
be relevant to more narrow-scope claims  about  the  intuitiveness  of  premises
(2) and (3) of the Consequence argument. If an incompatibilist  wants to  sup-
port these premises by appealing to  pretheoretical intuitions,  then  our  meth-
odology suggests that  this  move  requires empirical investigation  of  the  rele-
vant intuitions no less than the questions we have set out to answer.

4.2.3 Conflicting intuitions
There is  another reason an incompatibilist  like  Liv  should worry  about  our
results.  Even  if  it  were  shown  to  be  true  that  people  have  the  intuitions
about, for instance, the concept of choice that would support premises (2) and
(3) of  the  Consequence argument,  it  is  not  clear that  this  fact  would  secure
the case for incompatibilism.  Suppose  that  a majority  of  participants in  our
experiments are expressing intuitions to the effect that  individuals may  count
as free and responsible even if determined. Furthermore, suppose  for the  sake
of  argument,  that  a large portion  of  these same people also  have  the  intui-
tions needed to support premises (2) and (3). It then appears that  these people
have inconsistent  intuitions—or,  given  the  difficulty in  individuating  intui-
tions, perhaps they merely lack an intuition  they  ought  to  have. Either way,
they are subject to  a kind of  intuitional  inconsistency:  their  set  of  free-will-

                                                                                                        
33
Thanks to Al Mele for help with this point. See Lycan (2003) for  a  Moorean  argument  to
the effect that  we  should  reject  controversial  philosophical  premises  (e.g.,  the  Transfer
principle)  when  they  commit  us  to  a  highly  counterintuitive  conclusion  (e.g.,  that  we
would lack—and would have always lacked—free will and  moral  responsibility  if  physi-
cists discover determinism to be true).

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    45

       
       
relevant intuitions fails  to  form a consistent  whole.  If so,  their set  of  intui-
tions would fail to  cohere in  a way that  we,  as  philosophers,  could straight-
forwardly use  in  constructing a philosophical  theory of  free will.  Hence,  in
order to build a coherent, unified theory of  free will,  we would either need to
accuse the  folk  of  error  in  their  judgments  about  our  scenarios,  to  accuse
them of error in the intuitive judgments meant to underwrite the Consequence
argument, or, as  above, to  deny the  link  between the  ordinary conception of
free will and the concept of choice invoked in the Consequence argument.

Of course, if  it  turns  out  that  there is  no  consistent  set  of  pretheoretical
intuitions  relevant  to  free  will,  philosophers  may  decide  not  to  provide  a
coherent, unified theory of  free will  after all.  Richard  Double,  for  instance,
argues (1991, 1996)  that,  as  a matter of  empirical fact, our  intuitions  about
free will are in  serious conflict and that  this  conflict entails  that  there is  no
such  thing  as  free will.  More precisely, he holds that  this  “intuitional  anar-
chy” (1991,  ch.  5)  about  which choices count  as  free  entails  that  the  term
‘free will’  (and various cognates) lacks an extension and  functions  in  much
the  same way that  non-cognitivists  think  ethical terms  function.  In  his  ter-
minology, free will is “non-real” (1991), and “Our proclaiming choices to  be
free and persons to  be morally  responsible for their choices  can  be  nothing
more than our venting  of  non-truth-valued attitudes, none of  which is  ‘more
correct’ or ‘more rational’ than competing attitudes” (1996: 3).34

Another route for denying that there is a unified account of  free will—one
which does not  relegate our  talk  about  ‘free will’  to  the  realm of  non-truth-
valued attitudes—draws on contextualist semantics and suggests that  there are
in fact a number of properties which, in different contexts, people mean when
they  use  the  concept of  free will.35  This  is  not  just  the  mundane claim  that
‘free’ is ambiguous between multiple meanings (e.g., political freedom, relig-
ious  freedom, zero-cost). Rather,  it  is  the  claim  that  when  people  use  ‘free
will’ in contexts and ways intimately tied up  with  practices of  moral respon-
sibility,  sometimes  it  expresses one content,  compatible  with  determinism,
and other times—notably,  in  philosophical  discussions when  the  criteria  of
applicability  become  more  stringent—it  expresses  another  content,  incom-
patible with determinism.

However, it seems clear to us that neither the non-cognitivist nor  the  con-
textualist approach to the kind of intuitional  conflict discussed above will  be
satisfactory to  incompatibilists.  For  we take  it  that  incompatibilists,  when
stating  their thesis,  are  making  a  claim  about  free  will  that  has  cognitive
content and that is true in  all  contexts (or at  least all  contexts where interest
                                                                                                        
34 We think this conclusion is  too  hasty  for  several  reasons.  For  instance,  even  if  ordinary
intuitions suggest conflicting concepts of free will, that would  not  entail  that  there  are  no
free choices. It  might  just  mean  that  the  concept  is  indeterminate  in  meaning  (compare
Sider 2001, on the concept of personal identity).
See, e.g., Graham and Horgan (1998) and Hawthorne (2001).

35

46    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

in free will is tied to questions of  moral responsibility).  Thus,  in  the  face of
our  data, and assuming  empirical research showed people in  fact have  intui-
tions supporting (C), the incompatibilist will have to find a way  of  resolving
this conflict of intuitions in a way that helps his or her case.36

As we have already seen, Liv’s way of resolving this conflict is to suggest
that our intuitions about choice are more ‘basic’ than the intuitions about  free
will  evoked by  our  scenarios. However, it  is  not  clear  what  ‘basic’  is  sup-
posed to mean in this context.37 Liv may mean that they  are more explanato-
rily basic, since (on her view) someone is morally  responsible for x-ing only
if he x-ed freely, and he x-ed freely only  if  he had a choice about  whether or
not  he x-ed. This  itself  relies on  further conceptual  claims,  though—claims
which involve  the  relationship  between  free  will  and  having  a  choice,  and
which are hotly contested.38

Furthermore, it is not clear that being  more explanatorily basic is  a suffi-
cient reason for one intuition  to  trump  another in  the  case of  conflict.  Judg-
ments about  cases do seem to  override intuitions  about  the  more explanato-
rily basic entities at  least some of  the  time.  Take, for instance,  the  example
of intentional action. Intentional actions are explained, in  part,  by  an agent’s
intentions;  thus,  intentions  seem to  be more explanatorily basic than  inten-
tional actions. Indeed, a popular theory of  intentional  action claims  that  one
intentionally does x if and only  if  one has  an intention  to  x and successfully
executes that  intention  (see Adams and Steadman 2004).  However,  philoso-
phers empirically testing  folk  intuitions  have  found  that  there  are  cases  in
which most  laypersons will  judge that  an agent intentionally  did  x  without
having  the  intention  to  x.  One interesting  example involves  a  C.E.O.  who
implements a program in order to increase profits,  knowing  that  the  program
will  harm the  environment  but  not  aiming  to  harm  it.  In  experiments  by
Joshua  Knobe (2003),  87%  of  respondents  judged  that  the  chairman  inten-
tionally  harmed the  environment,  although  only  29%  said  that  he  had  the

37

                                                                                                        
36
Admittedly, it is not immediately obvious  that  conflicting  intuitions  provide  any  succor  to
compatibilists, either, especially if compatibilism is committed to the existence of  a  univo-
cal meaning for ‘free’ on which claims like “Joe  was  determined  and  acted  freely”  can
come out true. However, the  thesis  we  are  defending  is  not  that  ordinary  intuitions  sup-
port  compatibilism,  but  merely  that  they  do  not  support  incompatibilism.  (Thanks  to  an
anonymous referee for pressing us on this point.)
Perhaps it means that the intuitions about  choice  are  stronger  than  the  intuitions  we  elic-
ited to the  extent  that  people  would  be  less  likely  to  give  up  the  former  rather  than  the
latter. (We owe this point to Tom Crisp.) If so, this claim would  require  empirical  support
that will certainly be difficult to garner.
If  ‘having  a  choice’  is  equated  with  having  alternative  possibilities,  this  claim  will  be
undermined  if  Frankfurt-style  counterexamples  are  possible  (that  is,  if  it  is  possible  for
someone to freely A without being  able  to  avoid  A-ing.)  The  success  or  failure  of  these
counterexamples seems itself a  matter  deeply  tied  up  with  intuition;  see  Doris  and  Stich
(forthcoming)  and  Woolfolk,  Doris,  and  Darley  (2006)  for  empirical  examinations  of
such examples.

38

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    47

       
       
intention  to  harm the  environment.  In  the  action-theory  literature,  theories
may aim to  preserve people’s intuitions  about  cases such  as  these and reject
the intuition  that  intentionally  doing x requires an intention  to  x (e.g.,  Brat-
man 1984). Yet the intuition about  intentions  would be the  more explanato-
rily basic intuition, at least on the taxonomy of intuitions that Liv endorses.
The  upshot  is  that,  to  the  extent  that  a  philosophical  theory  (e.g.,  of
intentional  action or  free will)  aims  to  account for and accord with  ordinary
intuitions, it is unclear what its proponents should  do in  the  face of  conflict-
ing  intuitions.  One  might  try  to  explain  the  conflict  with  a  contextualist
approach, as we suggested above. One might  also  develop a theory that  calls
for the revision of some of  our  concepts and practices. Some  theories of  free
will  are  revisionist  in  this  way,  suggesting  that  the  more  metaphysically
demanding aspects of  the  ordinary conception of  free will  can  be  eliminated
but  that  most  of  it  can  be  preserved  (see  Vargas,  2005).  But  as  we  have
already  seen,  it  is  unclear  why  a  philosophical  theory  of  free  will  should
revise the ordinary conception to make it more metaphysically demanding.

In  any  case,  if  the  claim  that  “incompatibilism  is  intuitive”  is  to  be
understood as (C), then the claim is no longer able to  do the  dialectical work
it was supposed to do. We have argued that  one dialectical role of  incompati-
bilists’ claims of intuitive support is to shift the burden of  proof to  the  com-
patibilist. Roughly, incompatibilists cite the intuitiveness  of  their own  view
in  an effort to  show  that  compatibilism  is  counter-intuitive;  compatibilists
then  have to  explain why  their own  counter-intuitive claims  are  better  war-
ranted than  the  incompatibilist’s  intuitive  claims.  However, given  our  data,
merely citing (C)  does not  show  that  incompatibilism  is  any more intuitive
than its competitors. At best, it shows that people have conflicting  intuitions
about free will and that neither compatibilism nor incompatibilism  is  univo-
cally intuitive; this hardly provides reason to favor one theory over another.

4.3 Give up the claim that incompatibilism is intuitive
Once incompatibilists  see their dialectical position,  they  may  be inclined to
give up on  the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is  supported by  the  intuitions  of
ordinary people and find some other way to  defend incompatibilism  that  does
not make use of this strategy. We have already suggested why this move  puts
the  incompatibilist  in  the  uncomfortable  position  of  having  to  motivate  a
theory  of  free  will  that  is  both  less  intuitive  and  more  metaphysically
demanding than  compatibilist  alternatives. However, our  main  target in  this
paper is  the  claim  that  incompatibilism  has  wide-scale  intuitive  appeal.  If
incompatibilists  back off of  this  claim,  one  of  our  goals  has  been  accom-
plished.  Consequently,  we  will  not  undertake  a  detailed  discussion  of  the
strengths and weaknesses of the strategy of entirely rejecting the role of  intui-
tions in the free will debate.

48    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

That being said, we explained (in  §1)  why,  given  the  connection between
free will  and  things  we  care  about,  such  as  moral  responsibility,  ordinary
intuitions  and practices do matter to  philosophical  conceptions of  free  will.
And  we  explained  why  we  think  incompatibilists  cannot  entirely  eschew
intuitions as support for  their thesis.  Incompatibilists  have a metaphysically
demanding theory of  free will:  in  order to  make ascriptions of  free  will  and
moral responsibility come out true, compatibilist  theories set  conditions that
are  consistent  with  the  truth  of  determinism  or  indeterminism,  whereas
incompatibilist  theories require the  truth  of  indeterminism (occurring at  just
the right place in the agent), and perhaps also agent causation.39  A  conceptual
corollary to  Ockham’s Razor suggests  that  when  choosing  among  theories,
all  else being  equal, we should choose the  one that  has  less  metaphysically
demanding truth-conditions for its claims. 40 If this  corollary is  accepted, then
incompatibilists  will  have to  insist  that  all  else is  not  equal. It  is  not  clear
how  the  incompatibilist  can  establish  this  other  than  by  showing  that
incompatibilism simply does a  better job  of  preserving intuitions—the  right
intuitions, whichever ones those may be—than compatibilism does.

This  observation reinforces our  general methodological point.  In  order to
show  that  one  theory  preserves  intuitions  of  a  certain  type  better  than
another, we must be  fairly certain exactly what the  intuitions  of  those  types
actually are.  We have argued  that  the  best  way  to  gain  a  handle  on  what
those intuitions actually are will require empirical investigation,  not  solely  a
priori armchair speculation. After all,  it  appears that  many  incompatibilists,
largely on the basis of such a priori reasoning, concluded that something  like
(P)  was true—and yet,  if  our  investigations  are any indication, (P)  is  false.
Likewise, incompatibilists who wish to defend some other claim, such  as  (L)
or (C), would do well to look  for empirical evidence in  support  of  the  claim
that most people have the  relevant intuitions.  Without  such  support,  incom-
patibilists run the risk of  demanding more out  of  the  universe than  our  ordi-
nary intuitions about free will and moral responsibility require.

5. Conclusion

We have advanced several claims  in  this  paper.  First,  we  demonstrated  that
incompatibilists often suggest that their conception of free will is intuitive  to
ordinary people and that the burden of  proof is  therefore on  compatibilists  to

                                                                                                        
39
Recent compatibilists generally  reject  the  claim  made  by  earlier  compatibilists  that  free
will  requires  determinism.  For  an  event-causal  libertarian  view  that  requires  quantum
indeterminism in the agent’s brain  at  precisely  the  moment  of  choice,  see  Kane  (1996).
See O’Connor (2000) and Clarke (2003) for discussions of agent causation.

40 More precisely: if, for every sentence S1 in theory T1 and  its  counterpart  S2  in  T2,  if  S1’s
truth-conditions are no more  metaphysically  demanding  than  S2’s,  and  if  some  sentence
S2 in T2 has more  demanding  truth-conditions  than  its  counterpart  S1  in  T1,  then,  all  else
being equal, T1 ought to be accepted.

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    49

       
       
explain away incompatibilist  intuitions  or  to  offer  deflationary  accounts  of
these intuitions. We argued that, absent any appeal to intuitions,  it  is  instead
incompatibilist positions that must be motivated since (a)  they  are advancing
a claim about  conceptual necessity (i.e.,  that  determinism necessarily entails
the non-existence of free will), and (b) they  involve  a conception of  free will
that  is  more metaphysically demanding than  the  alternatives.  We  suggested
that  incompatibilists’  appeals to  ordinary people’s intuitions  have  served  in
part to motivate these demands and to situate the burden of proof on  compati-
bilists.  But,  we  argued,  these  claim  about  people’s  intuitions  should  be
empirically tested rather than  asserted based on  philosophers’ own  post-theo-
retical intuitions  or  their  informal polling  of  students.  We  offered  our  own
experiments as an initial demonstration of this methodology, and offered sev-
eral responses to them. Our results suggest that  most  laypersons do not  have
incompatibilist  intuitions,  though  this  preliminary  work  should  be  supple-
mented in order to get a firmer grasp on the relevant intuitions.  To  the  extent
that our results have in fact uncovered what people’s pretheoretical intuitions
about free will are, we suggest  that  the  incompatibilist  carries the  burden of
explaining  why  these intuitions  do not  illuminate  the  proper  conception  of
free will. We have not argued that  “less intuitive”  entails  “incorrect”—which
would admittedly be a bad argumentative strategy.  Instead, we focused on  the
claim that, in the face of data suggesting incompatibilism is  not  the  intuitive
view, incompatibilist theories become increasingly difficult to motivate.

Minimally, we believe that empirical data about folk  intuitions  should (a)
encourage philosophers to state more precisely whether or  not  they  are inter-
ested in ordinary intuitions about free will and moral responsibility  and why,
(b) prevent philosophers from appealing to  the  wide-scale intuitive  plausibil-
ity of their theories unless these  claims  can be empirically substantiated, and
(c)  encourage  philosophers  to  re-examine  some  of  their  own  assumptions
concerning the role of intuitions  in  philosophy.  And in  the  event that  a par-
ticular theory fails to settle  with  ordinary intuitions,  the  onus  will  be on  its
proponents to  explain  why  we  should  care  about  a  technical  notion  rather
than the ordinary one—especially when understanding the  latter is  an impor-
tant philosophical goal in its own right.41

                                                                                                        
41
For their helpful  suggestions  as  we  developed  this  project,  we  would  like  to  thank  John
Doris, Joshua Knobe, Tamler Sommers, Bill Lycan, and George Graham.  In  addition,  we
are  especially  grateful  for  beneficial  advice  on  earlier  drafts  of  this  paper  from  two
anonymous referees, and Shaun Nichols, Manuel Vargas, Tom Crisp, and Al Mele.

50    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

References

Beebee, H. and Mele,  A.  2002.  “Humean Compatibilism.”  Mind  111:  201-

223

Black, S.  and Tweedale, J.  2003.  “Responsibility  and Alternative  Possibili-
ties:  The Use and Abuse of  Examples.” The  Journal of  Ethics  6:  281-
303.

Campbell,  C.A.  1951.  “Is  ‘Freewill’  a  Pseudo-Problem?”  Mind  60  (240):

441-465.

Chalmers,  D.  1996.  The  Conscious  Mind:  In  Search  of  a  Fundamental

Theory. New York: Oxford University Press.

Clarke,  R.  2003.  Libertarian  Accounts  of  Free  Will.  New  York:  Oxford

University Press.

Cover, J.A. and J. O’Leary-Hawthorne. 1996. “Free agency and Materialism.”
In  Faith,  Freedom  and  Rationality,  J.  Jordan  and  D.  Howard-Snyder
(eds.), 47-71. Lanham, MD: Roman and Littlefield.

DePaul, M.R. and  Ramsey,  W.,  (eds.) 1998.  Rethinking Intuition: The  Psy-
chology of Intuition and Its Role in Philosophical Inquiry. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield.

Dennett, D. 1984. Elbow Room: The Varieties  of Free  Will  Worth  Wanting.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Doris, J. and S. Stich. forthcoming. “As a Matter of Fact: Empirical  Perspec-
tives  on  Ethics.  In  The  Oxford  Handbook  of  Contemporary  Analytic
Philosophy, F. Jackson & M. Smith (eds.).

Double, R. 1991. The Non-Reality of Free  Will.  New York: Oxford Univer-

sity Press.

Double,  R.  1996.  Metaphilosophy  and Free  Will.  New York: Oxford Uni-

versity Press.

Earman, J. 2004. “Determinism:  What We Have Learned and What We Still
Don’t  Know.”  In  Freedom  and  Determinism,  J.K.  Campbell,  M.
O’Rourke, and D. Shier (eds.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Ekstrom, L. 2002. “Libertarianism and Frankfurt-style Cases.” In The Oxford
Handbook of Free  Will,  R.  Kane  (ed.).  New  York:  Oxford  University
Press.

Ekstrom, L. 2000. Free Will. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Fischer, J. 1994. The Metaphysics of Free Will. Cambridge: Blackwell.
Frankfurt, H.  1969.  “Alternate  Possibilities  and  Moral  Responsibility.”  In
The  Importance  of What  We  Care  About.  Cambridge: Cambridge  Uni-
versity Press, 1988.

Goldman, A.  and Pust,  J.  1998.  “Philosophical  Theory and Intuitional  Evi-

dence.” In DePaul and Ramsey (eds.).

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    51

       
       
Graham, G. and Horgan, T. 1998. “Southern Fundamentalism and the  End of

Philosophy.” In Depaul and Ramsey (eds.).

Hawthorne, J. 2001.  “Freedom in  Context.”  Philosophical  Studies  104:  63-

79.

Horgan,  T.,  Tienson,  J.  and  Graham,  G.  2003.  “The  Phenomenology  of
First-person Agency.” In Physicalism and Mental  Causation,  S.  Walter
& H. Heckman (eds.). Imprint Academic.

Jackson,  F.  1998.  From Metaphysics  to Ethics:  A  Defense  of  Conceptual

Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press.

Kane, R. 1999. “Responsibility, Luck, and Chance: Reflections on  Free Will

and Indeterminism.” Journal of Philosophy 96: 217-240.

Kane, R. 1996. The Significance of Free Will. New York: Oxford  University

Press.

Knobe, J. 2003.  “Intentional Action  and Side-effects in  Ordinary Language.”

Analysis 63:190-193.

Knobe,  J.  2004.  “Intention,  Intentional  Action  and  Moral  Considerations.”

Analysis 64: 181-187.

Lycan, W. 2003. “Free Will and the Burden of Proof.”  In  Proceedings  of the
Royal  Institute  of Philosophy  for 2001-02, Anthony  O’Hear  (ed.),  107-
122. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Markosian, N. 1999. “A Compatibilist Version of the  Theory of  Agent Cau-

sation.” Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 80: 257-277.

Mele, A. 2005. “A Critique of Pereboom's ‘Four Case  Argument’ for Incom-

patibilism.”  Analysis 65.

Nadelhoffer, T. 2004. “The Butler Problem Revisited.” Analysis,  64(3),  277-

284.

Nadelhoffer,  T.  2005.  “Skill,  Luck,  and  Folk  Ascriptions  of  Intentional

Action.” Philosophical Psychology 24: 196-213.

Nahmias, E., Morris, S., Nadelhoffer, T. & Turner,  J.  2004.  “The Phenome-
nology  of  Free Will.”  Journal of Consciousness  Studies  11(7-8):  162-
179.

Nahmias,  E.,  Morris,  S.,  Nadelhoffer,  T.  &  Turner,  J.  2005.  “Surveying
Freedom: Folk  Intuitions  about  Free  Will  and  Moral  Responsibility.”
Philosophical Psychology 18(5): 561-584.

Nichols,  S.  2004.  “The  Folk  Psychology  of  Free  Will:  Fits  and  Starts.”

Mind and Language 19: 473-502.

Nichols, S. 2004. “After Objectivity.” Philosophical Psychology 17: 5-28.
Nichols, S., J. Weinberg, and  S.  Stich.  2002.  “Metaskepticism: Meditations
in  Ethno-epistemology.”  In  The  Skeptics,  S.  Luper  (ed.).  Burlington,
VT: Ashgate.

Nichols,  S.  and  Knobe,  J. 

forthcoming.  “Moral  Responsibility  and

Determinism: The Cognitive Science of Folk Intuitions.” Noûs.

52    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

Nowell-Smith, P.H. 1949. “Free Will  and Moral Responsibility.”  Mind  57:

45-65.

O’Connor,  T.  2000. Persons  and Causes:  The  Metaphysics  of  Free  Will.

New York: Oxford University Press.

Pereboom, D. 2001. Living Without  Free  Will.  Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-

versity Press.

Pink,  T.  2004.  Free  Will:  A  Very  Short  Introduction.  New  York:  Oxford

University Press.

Sider, T.  2001.  “Criteria of  Personal Identity and the  Limits  of  Conceptual
Analysis.”  Philosophical  Perspectives  15,  Metaphysics.  James  E.
Livberlin, ed. 189-209.

Smilansky,  S.  2003.  “Compatibilism:  The  Argument  from  Shallowness.”

Philosophical Studies 115(3): 257-282.

Stich,  S.  and  J.M.  Weinberg.  2001.  “Jackson’s  Empirical  Assumptions.”

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 62: 637-643.

Turner, J. and Nahmias, E. 2006. “Are the Folk  Agent-Causationists?” Mind

& Language 21 (5): 597-609.

Vargas,  M.  2005.  “The  Revisionist’s  Guide  to  Moral  Responsibility.”

Philosophical Studies 125(3): 399-429.

van Inwagen, P. 1983. An Essay on Free Will. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Velleman, D.  2000.  “Epistemic Freedom.”  In  The  Possibility  of  Practical

Reason. New York: Oxford University Press.

Warfield, T.  2000.  “A  New  Argument  for  Incompatibilism.  Philosophical

Perspectives 14: 167-180.

Wolf,  S.  1990.  Freedom  Within  Reason.  New  York:  Oxford  University

Press.

Woolfolk,  R.,  Doris,  J.  and  Darley,  J.  2006.  “Identification,  Situational
Constraint,  and Social  Cognition:  Studies  in  the  Attribution  of  Moral
Responsibility.” Cognition 100(2): 283-306.

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    53

