Governance and Politics 

of the Netherlands 

Fourth Edition 

Rudy B. Andeweg 

and 

Galen A. Irwin 

palgrave 
macmillan 

Contents 

List of Illustrative Material 

Preface to  the Fourth Edition 

1  The Country, the Nation and the State 

A  'Small' Country 
The Struggle Against the Water 
Three Boundaries 

The Boundaries of Language and Religion 
The Political Boundary 

National Identity and Political Culture 

Calvinism and Tolerance 
A Nation of Joiners 

Constitutional Development 

2  A Country of Minorities 

Three Threats to Stable Government 

Minorities 
Two Dimensions 
Pillarization 

Consociational Democracy 
Alternative Interpretations 
Depillarization 
Multiculturalism as  a New Social Cleavage? 
The Consequences of Depillarization 

3  Political Parties and the Party System 

Parties and Consociational Democracy 
Political Party System 

The Numerical Criterion 
Party Families 
Dimensionality 
Party Organization 
Party Structure 
Party Membership 
Party Finances 

Parties and Elections 

Candidate Selection - the List 

vii 

x 

xiii 

1 
1 
3 
5 
5 
6 
9 
9 
16 
20 

27 
27 
27 
32 
33 
39 
43 
46 
49 
54 

58 
58 
59 
59 
62 
73 
80 
80 
83 
86 
91 
91 

PBO and Advisory Councils 
Changes in Corporatism 
The Sources of Corporatism 

The Bureaucracy 
Judicial Policy-Making 
Conclusion 

8  Multi-Level Governance 
The Territorial Dimension 
Subnational Government 

Provincial Government 
Local Government 

Europeanization 

Strengthening Coordination 
Strengthening the Core Executive 

A Double Democratic Deficit 

9  Economic and Welfare Policy 

Open Economy 
Macro-economic Policy 

The Creation of the Welfare State and the 'Dutch Disease' 
Restructuring the Welfare State and the  'Dutch Miracle' 
New Challenges and Crises 

Consensus and Conflict on Macro-economic Policy 

10  Foreign Policy 

'Constants' in Dutch Foreign Policy 
Farewell to Atlanticism? 
A European Turnaround? 
Interests versus Idealism? 
The Domestication of Dutch Foreign Policy 

11  Evaluating Consensus Government 

Fragmentation and Horizontal Coordination 
The Consequences of Consensus 
Public Confidence in the Political System 
Attempts at Reform 
The Future of Consensus Government 

Further Reading 

Bibliography 

Index 

Contents 

ix 

191 
193 
196 
198 
203 
211 

212 
212 
212 
212 
214 
220 
222 
226 
228 

230 
230 
233 
234 
237 
242 
248 

251 
251 
253 
259 
267 
270 

272 
272 
274 
277 
283 
285 

288 

291 

313 

10 

Foreign Policy 

'Constants' in Dutch Foreign Policy 

Peace,  Profits  and  Principles  is  the  catchy,  alliterative  title  of a  book  on  Dutch 
foreign  policy  by  Joris Voorhoeve  (1979),  scholar-politician and  one-time Minister 
of Defence  (1994-8).  Under  these  three  headings  he  sought  to  analyse  the  major 
traditions  of  Dutch  foreign  policy,  which  he  described  as  'maritime  commer(cid:173)
cialism' ,  'neutralist  abstentionism'  and  'internationalist  idealism'.  Others  have 
objected  to  the  concept  of traditions  in  this  respect,  even  arguing  that  the  Dutch 
have  insufficient  historic  sense  for  traditions.  Such  authors  prefer  to  speak  of 
tendencies,  themes  or  constants,  and  some  of  them  have  amended  or  enlarged 
Voorhoeve's  list.  On  closer  inspection,  however,  the  themes  mentioned  by  other 
authors  remain  closely  related  to  the  clusters of attitudes  mentioned by Voorhoeve 
(Helclring,  1978;  Scheffer,  1988;  Hellema,  2010;  Hellema  et  al.,  2011;  Knapen  et 
al.,  2011).  There  is  also  very  little  disagreement  concerning  the  origins  of such 
tendencies or traditions. 

Both the  size  and  geographical location  of the country have left their imprint on 
its  external  relations.  The  Dutch  domestic  market  being  quite  small,  but  located 
ideally  to  serve  as  a  gateway  to  the  European  hinterland,  the  Netherlands  came 
to  rely  on  maritime  trade  (see  Chapter 9).  This  brought an  Atlantic  perspective  to 
its  foreign  policy,  sometimes  bordering  on  anti-continentalism. In the  seventeenth 
century,  Pieter  de  la  Court,  a  Leiden  merchant  and  political  scientist,  even  advo(cid:173)
cated cutting a wide  swath of water to  the  east of the province of Holland to  sepa(cid:173)
rate it from  the European continent. As  late as  the  1950s,  the Dutch Foreign Office 
proclaimed:  'The  Netherlands  cannot  exist  without  Europe,  but  it is  a  continental 
European  nation  neither  in  its  history,  nor  in  its  character.'  This  attitude  was  also 
recognized  abroad,  as  when  French  Foreign  Minister Maurice  Couve  de  Murville 
was reported to have explained to his US counterpart that: 

The Netherlands was an island in the same sense that the United Kingdom was an island. 
The Dutch had never really been interested in Europe, always looking out over the waters 
at other areas of the world .. . [T]hey were not Europeans - at least they were not continen(cid:173)
tal Europeans - as were the French and the Germans. (Quoted in Reyn, 2009, p.  414) 

251 

letters  of  which  the  Netherlands  did  not  eagerly  become  a  member'  (Van  Der 
Beugel,  1995,  p.  120).  The  three  most  important of these  acronyms  are  also  most 
suited  to  a discussion  of the  three  'constants'  in  the  foreign  policy  of the  country: 
NATO ('peace'), the EU ('profits') and the UN ('principles'). 

Foreign Policy  253 

Farewell to Atlanticism? 

The Dutch decision to join the Atlantic Alliance was  opposed only by the Commu(cid:173)
nist Party,  and has never been seriously questioned. The original support for NATO 
should  be  understood  against  the  backdrop  of  anxiety  over  Soviet  imperialism, 
fuelled  in particular by  the  Communist takeover in  Czechoslovakia in  1948. Grat(cid:173)
itude for  the American  effort to  liberate the  Netherlands in  1945  and for  Marshall 
Plan  aid  for  rebuilding  the  ruined  Dutch  economy  also  played  a  part,  tempered 
only  marginally  by  anger  over American  pressure  to  end  the  successful  military 
actions against Indonesian insurgents or to rebuild and restructure the armed forces 
(Mallinson, 2010). 

Despite  later criticisms  of NATO  membership  of the then  dictatorial regimes  of 
Portugal  and  Greece,  despite  opposition  to  American  involvement  in  Indo-China 
and  Latin  America,  and  even  despite  misgivings  over  NATO's  nuclear  strategy, 
public  support  for  NATO  membership  has  never  wavered  - at  the  height  of  the 
controversy  over NATO's  nuclear weapons,  the percentage in favour  of leaving the 
Alliance  did  not  exceed  20  per cent  (Everts,  1983,  p.  30),  and  no  major party  has 
ever  advocated  withdrawal  from  NATO,  not  even  a  partial,  'French',  one.  During 
the first decades of the Alliance, the Netherlands acted as  a particularly staunch ally 
and a loyal supporter of US leadership in the Alliance. 

The Dutch share in NATO's defence expenditure has been relatively high compared 
with that of other smaller member states (Voorhoeve,  1979, pp.  130--1; Honig,  1993). 
The Dutch  were  among  the  15  countries  that joined the  USA in the  Korean War  (a 
UN  mission  de  Jure,  but  de  facto  a  US  mission).  In  1957,  the  Netherlands  wasted 
no  time  in  becoming the  first  European  ally  to  accept American nuclear  missiles  on 
its  territory. While  other member  states  demanded  a say  in  the  engagement  of such 
weaponry  ('dual  key'),  the  Dutch  were  happy  to  leave  this  responsibility  entirely  to 
the  US  government. A new  quarrel  with  the Americans  over Dutch colonialism,  this 
time  about  the  Dutch-Indonesian conflict  over  New  Guinea  in  1961-2, did  little  to 
weaken Dutch enthusiasm for the Atlantic Alliance. This is evidenced, for example, in 
the steadfast refusal of long-time Foreign Minister Joseph Luns (1956-71) to convey 
to  Washington  the  protests  of the  Dutch  Parliament  over American  intervention  in 
Vietnam.  As  will be seen in the next  section, the Dutch government long  objected to 
plans for European rather than Atlantic defence arrangements, and served almost as an 
American proxy in the European Union.  One author even struggled to  find  a distinc(cid:173)
tion  between the Dutch role of faithful  ally  and that of a vassal  or satellite state:  the 
submission of the Dutch to American leadership, he suggested, was  not imposed, but 
voluntary!  (Van Staden, 1978, p.  153). 

254  Governance and Politics of the Netherlands 

The Atlantic  orientation  of Dutch  foreign  policy  apparently  weakened  between 
1970 and 1985. After the retirement of Luns as  Minister of Foreign Affairs in 197l 
the  Dutch  government  had  fewer  misgivings  about  decrying  US  overt  and  cove~ 
involvement in Latin America,  and in Vietnam in particular.  Over strong US  objec(cid:173)
tions,  the  Netherlands  supported the  acceptance of the  People's Republic  of China 
as  a  member  of the  UN  in  1971.  In  1975,  the  Dutch  even  targeted  Cuba  as  one 
of the  countries  on  which  to  concentrate  its  development  aid.  However,  the  most 
important purported example of a change in Dutch foreign policy in this period was 
an  increased emphasis  on  arms  control,  and  in  particular on  a reduction of nuclear 
weapons.  The proposal by the US  Carter administration in  1977-8 to  introduce the 
'neutron bomb'  (or  the  'enhanced  radiation,  reduced blast'  weapon  as  it was  offi(cid:173)
cially called) served to mobilize a large portion of the population into  what became 
known  as  the  'peace  movement' ,  a  loose  coalition  of left-wing  political  parties, 
trade unions, fringe  groups  and individuals,  dominated by two  organizations linked 
to  the  churches  in  the  Netherlands,  the  Catholic  Pax  Christi  and  the  Interchurch 
Peace Council (IKV).  The fact that President Carter decided to  shelve the plans for 
the  neutron  bomb  was  interpreted  by  the  peace  movement  as  a  victory,  and  rein(cid:173)
forced its  resolve when,  only a year later,  in  1979,  NATO  decided on  the moderni(cid:173)
zation of the alliance's intermediate-range theatre nuclear weapons. As part of those 
plans,  the  Netherlands  was  to  accept  the  stationing  of 48  cruise  and  Pershing  II 
missiles on Dutch territory. 

That  proposal  sparked  what  became  probably  the  greatest  political  contro(cid:173)
versy  over  foreign  policy  since  decolonization.  Unprecedentedly  large  demonstra(cid:173)
tions  (each  of around  half a  million  participants)  against  the  missiles  took  place, 
in Amsterdam in  1981  and in  The Hague in  1983.  The following  year,  3.2 million 
Dutch citizens petitioned the  government to  reject NATO's  nuclear modernization. 
Surveys  consistently  showed  that  the  majority  of the  population  were  opposed  to 
the  missiles.  The  main  political  parties  were  divided  internally,  though  officially 
the  VVD  welcomed  NATO's  plans,  and  the  PvdA  opposed  them.  For  the  newly 
formed  CDA,  however,  the  situation  was  most  threatening because of the  involve(cid:173)
ment of the  churches  in the peace movement.  In  the  absence  of consensus,  immo(cid:173)
bilism is often the result, and this case proved no exception. The Dutch government 
announced  formal  reservations  to  the  NATO  plans  in what became  known  as  'the 
Dutch footnote'  to  the protocol of the NATO meeting (on the government's internal 
decision-making,  see  Kaarbo,  2012,  pp.  92-100).  The  Dutch  were  granted  a 
two-year delay  to  determine  their position,  but this  proved insufficient  and further 
postponements  were  necessary.  Eventually,  the  Dutch  position  within  NATO 
became  untenable,  and  in  1984  Prime  Minister  Lubbers  presented  a  compro(cid:173)
mise  that  must  be  one  of the  most  ingenuous  depoliticization  ploys  in the  history 
of consociationalism.  A  final  decision  to  accept  or  refuse  the  American  missiles 
was  to  be  postponed  by  one  more  year.  If by  1 November  1985  the  Soviets  had 
not increased the number of their SS-20 missiles, the Dutch would refuse to accept 
the  cruise  missiles,  whereas  any  increase  in  the  number  of SS-20s  would  lead  to 
automatic  acceptance of the US  missiles.  In practice, this  clever manoeuvre shifted 

Foreign Policy  255 

responsibility  for  Dutch  foreign  policy  to  the  Kremlin. After  a  year,  the  Soviets 
appeared  to  have  added  to  their  number  of  missiles,  and  without  any  signif(cid:173)
icant  protest  it was  decided  to  accept  the  American  weapons.  Shortly  afterwards, 
however,  Mikhail Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan reached an arms reduction agree(cid:173)
ment,  making the Netherlands the only NATO  country to accept the cruise missiles, 
but where they were never deployed. 

It  was  this  episode  in  particular  that  led  to  the  diagnosis  of  'Hollanditis' ,  a 

supposedly  contagious  Dutch  disease  (Laqueur,  1981).  Laqueur  and  others  spec(cid:173)
ulated  about  a re-emergence  of neutralism  in  Dutch foreign  policy,  now  that  both 
gratitude for American aid and fear of Soviet expansionism had waned. Such a diag(cid:173)
nosis  is  valid  only  if it  is  accepted  that  the  penchant  for  neutralist  abstentionism 
disappeared  when  the  Netherlands  joined  the  Atlantic  Alliance.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  we  agree with the view that NATO  only provided the security umbrella under 
which  the  Dutch  could  continue  to  foster  their  aloofness  from  power  politics,  the 
Dutch  misgivings  about  nuclear  weapons  and American  foreign  policy  cannot  be 
interpreted in this way. 

We  need  not  go  deeply  into  the  merits  of the  Hollanditis  diagnosis,  however, 
because  the  end  of the  cruise  missiles  controversy  also  signalled  the  end  of this 
period:  the  peace  movement  all  but  disappeared  and  the  foreign  policy  consensus 
was  restored.  The  continuation  of the  Atlantic  orientation  showed  itself  in  such 
decisions  as  the  removal  of  Cuba  from  the  list  of  recipients  of  Dutch  develop(cid:173)
ment  aid;  the  unquestioned  participation  in  the  US-led  coalition  in  the  Gulf War 
in  1990-1  (when  the  near-unanimity  in  the  Dutch  Parliament  contrasted  starkly 
with  the divisions in the US  Senate);  the commitment of Dutch F-16 planes during 
NATO's bombing campaign in the Kosovo crisis in  1999 and so on. 

In  all likelihood there  has  hardly  been a deviation from Atlanticism in  the inter(cid:173)
vening  years. Yet  it should be  remembered that,  to  the extent that there are foreign 
policy  traditions,  they  are  traditions  of the  Dutch  foreign  policy  elite,  not  of the 
general public.  More than  other policy areas, foreign  policy has  always  been in the 
hands  of a small,  close-knit establishment.  In general,  foreign  policy  has  not  been 
the subject of conflicts between the  political parties,  with a few  notable exceptions 
(such  as  rows  over  a  Dutch  embassy  to  the  Holy  See  in  the  1920s,  for  example). 
Foreign  policy-making  was  also  never  embedded  in  a  neo-corporatist  network  of 
interest groups and advisory councils;  in many respects it was  the last remnant of a 
nineteenth-century  style of politics:  elitist and non-partisan.  This  changed abruptly 
in the late 1960s and early  1970s, however.  In Chapter 2 we saw how depillarization 
at first  seemed  to  change the policy-making  style,  with politicization,  polarization, 
and  a call for  more  citizen involvement.  In  the  field  of foreign  policy  this  resulted 
in more partisan proposals for the Netherlands'  external relations,  especially by the 
Labour Party,  and  by  more vocal  and  visible  'action groups'  seeking  to  change the 
country's  foreign  policy.  The Dutch  foreign-policy  elite  was  not  used  to  domestic 
critique,  and  may  have  reacted at first  with  uncertainty,  but while the official rhet(cid:173)
oric  became  more  neutralist,  the  reality  was  not  affected  very  much.  After all,  the 
cuts  in  the Dutch defence  budget in  the mid-1970s,  which have often been used as 

258 

point  to  two  major  constitutional  reforms  (regarded  as  the  'crown jewels'  for  D66) 
that  CDA  and  VVD  had  reluctantly  agreed  to  support  in  return:  popularly  elected 
mayors  and  an  electoral  reform  introducing  districts.  But  earlier  in  2005,  the  con(cid:173)
stitutional  amendment  allowing  the  popular  election  of mayors  failed  to  achieve  the 
required  two-thirds  majority  in  the  Senate  when  the  opposition  Labour  Party  voted 
against. When subsequent discussions within the coalition showed that support for the 
electoral reform proposal was crumbling,  the cabinet minister responsible, D66 leader 
Thom  De  Graaf,  resigned.  D66  stayed  in  the  coalition,  but  it  was  now  in search  of 
an issue with which  to  raise its  own  profile. Taking the lead in  the opposition against 
the  unpopular  Uruzgan  mission  provided  a  timely  opportunity,  and  D66  threat(cid:173)
ened  to  bring  down  the  cabinet  unless  the  request  for  troops  was  denied.  It  proved 
to  be  a  costly  miscalculation: the  threat  of a cabinet crisis  led  to  a  conflict between 
D66's  ministers  and  its  parliamentary  party.  Moreover,  the  opposition  Labour Party 
became convinced by NATO's contingency plans that fears of another Srebrenica were 
unfounded.  Previously,  Labour  had  not  supported  the  more  limited  deployment  of 
Dutch forces in Afghanistan, and its leader, Wouter Bos, explained his party's position 
in  a  2006  interview:  'I believe  that  the  future  of Dutch  foreign  policy  is  very  much 
within  European foreign  policy,  and  that's  where  we  should  go  first  to  find  our part(cid:173)
ners. We  shouldn't, almost without any  type of criticism, follow  the Americans when(cid:173)
ever they ask us something - which I am sad to say has been the pattern of the last few 
years  in  the Netherlands'  (cited  in  Kaarbo, 2012,  p.111;  see  also  Kaarbo  and  Cantir, 
2013).  Labour motivated its  change of heart with Dutch commitment to  'international 
solidarity', but it was  also rumoured that the desire to  be regarded  as  a reliable future 
coalition  partner  may  have  played  a  role  (Kaarbo,  2012,  p.  117).  Labour's  support 
secured a parliamentary majority for the mission.  D66  then reneged on its promise to 
pull out of the coalition and its parliamentary leader, Boris Dittrich, resigned, plunging 
the  party into  a crisis. A few  months later, D66 brought down  the government,  but on 
an unrelated issue. 

One  lesson  of Srebrenica  had  not  been  learned  in  the  decision-making  over  Uru(cid:173)
zgan:  to  have  guarantees  about  succession  at  the  end  of the  mission's  agreed  dura(cid:173)
tion. Labour had  limited  its  support  to  one  two-year  mission,  but  no  NATO  country 
volunteered to  take  over the  role  of the  Dutch forces  as  'lead  nation' . In 2007,  pres(cid:173)
sure  mounted  to  stay  for  another  two  years.  While  Dutch  public  opinion  had  never 
rallied around the flag once it was planted in Uruzgan, the government - now of CDA, 
Labour,  and  Christian  Union  - decided  to  continue Task  Force  Uruzgan  until  2008, 
albeit  with  a  slightly  larger  contribution  from  other  countries.  For  the  Labour  Party 
this  was  a  difficult  decision,  and  at  its  insistence,  the  decision  explicitly  mentioned 
that the mission would definitely end in 2010. 

In 2009, however, Foreign Affairs Minister Verhagen (CDA) made public statements 

to  the  effect  that  there  was  room  to  discuss  another  extension.  Labour  and  Chris(cid:173)
tian  Union  tried  to  put  a  stop  to  any  speculation  about  a  third  mandate  by  introduc(cid:173)
ing a parliamentary motion reminding the government of the  agreement to  pull  out in 
2010.  The motion received broad support in Parliament,  except from  CDA, the  small, 
orthodox  SGP,  and  D66(!).  Diplomatic  cables  later made  public  by  WikiLeaks  show 

260  Governance and Politics of the Netherlands 

monetary  policy  (the  euro).  The  differences  between  the  major  political  Parties  i 
terms of their support for European integration and EU enlargement were negligibJ: 
Public opinion in  the Netherlands  always  seemed to  be consistently  among  the most 
pro-integration in the Union (Everts, 2008). To the surprise of political leaders both at 
home and abroad, Dutch voters clearly rejected the EU constitutional treaty in 2005. It 
would be too easy to dismiss  this referendum result as  having to do more with either 
the  unpopularity  of  the  incumbent  government,  or  with  the  post-Fortuyn  populist 
mood of the voters than with the EU, but studies have shown that,  while the details of 
the  constitution may  not have  been the primary bone  of contention,  voting  'no'  was 
clearly associated with concerns about the EU rather than with domestic criticism. If a 

BOX 10.2 

The Dutch 'No' to the EU Constitution 

After first jolting the political establishment in The Hague by  giving the List Pim For(cid:173)
tuyn  (LPF) 26 seats in Parliament in  2002,  the  electorate created a second shockwave 
by turning out in high numbers  (63.3 per cent) to  soundly defeat the  'Treaty Establish(cid:173)
ing a Constitution for the European Union'  on 1 June 2005. 

In  some  ways  this  second  shockwave  was  a  result  of the  first.  Various  attempts  to 
write  the referendum  instrument into  the  Constitution  had  failed, and  a temporary ref(cid:173)
erendum act expired in  January  2005  (see Chapter 4).  It was  thus  rather surprising that 
the VVD joined the traditionally pro-referendum parties PvdA, Green Left, D66, SP and 
the populist Right to form a parliamentary majority that passed special legislation calling 
for  an  advisory  referendum on  the  EU Constitutional  treaty, leaving  only  the  Christian 
parties  CDA,  CU, and  SGP opposed. It is  hard  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  the  uncer(cid:173)
tainty and insecurity that overcame the political elite after the 2002 election contributed 
to their willingness to seek the advice of the voters on the European Constitution. 

The hope was,  apparently,  that by  calling a referendum they could give the impres(cid:173)
sion of listening to  the  voters,  who  would  in  tum  validate  their intentions: one of the 
explicit aims of the referendum was  to  'increase societal support for the parliamentary 
ratification of the EU Constitutional Treaty'  (Crum, 2007, p. 18). This hope was based 
on  the fact  that an  overwhelming majority of MPs  (128  out of 150) favoured  ratifica(cid:173)
tion,  and that early opinion polls showed that more than  70 per cent of Dutch citizens 
supported a constitution for  Europe  (Aarts and Van  Der Kolk, 2006, p.  243). No  one 
seemed fully prepared for the direction that the referendum took. 

With no experience in holding referendums, no one took the lead in rallying support 
for  the  treaty,  and  the  initiative  went  to  the  opposition.  The  Socialist  Party  was  the 
earliest to  begin  its  campaign,  and  was  in  the forefront  of opposition until  the day  of 
the  vote.  The Christian Union  achieved  some of its first  prominence when joining the 
opposition. On  the Righ~, the various heirs to Pim Fortuyn also opposed the treaty, but 
they were in too much disarray to play a leading role. When the constitution's support(cid:173)
ers  were finally  aware of the  situation,  they  resorted to  scare tactics (the lights  would 

Foreign Policy  261 

more general malaise in Dutch democracy also played a part, it is because the prepa(cid:173)
ration,  content  and  selling  of the  treaty  epitomized  for  many  the  elitist character of 
Dutch politics:  'this reinforced existing sentiments of estrangement between the elec(cid:173)
torate and the political establishment' (Crum, 2007, p.  24). 

Since the referendum, the Dutch government has  felt forced by public sentiment 
to  assume  a Eurosceptic  position.  It now  emphasizes  subsidiarity,  opposes  further 
enlargement in  practice, never  ceases  to  complain  about its  net contribution  to  the 
EU  budget,  seeks  to  postpone  giving  citizens  of new  Eastern  European  member 
states  access to the Dutch labour market, and is most hard-hearted in the conditions 
it wants to have attached to rescue packages for the Greek economy. 

go  out  in  The  Netherlands  after  a  'no'  vote,  warned  one  cabinet  minister;  peace  in 
Europe would be at risk,  added  another)  that proved to  be counterproductive (Nijeboer, 
2005). Moreover,  as  the voters  learned  more  about the content of the proposed consti(cid:173)
tution,  they  also became more opposed to  it.  Disaster could no longer be averted.  The 
only  thing  saving  the  major  parties  from  total  humiliation  was  the  rejection  of the 
treaty by French voters three days prior to the Dutch vote. 

Studies showed a variety of motivations associated with the  'no' vote. One complaint 
was  about  lack of information,  not  so  surprising  since  the  electorate  had  hardly  been 
informed about European developments over the previous half century, and merely send(cid:173)
ing each voter a summary of the proposed constitution hardly filled the need.  It was also 
clear that the referendum had come too soon after the introduction of the euro currency 
in 2002, which voters felt had led to price increases and in general had not been favour(cid:173)
able  to  the  Dutch  economy.  Likewise,  it came  too  soon  after  the  largest expansion  of 
the EU, when ten new  countries joined in 2004. Many voters were concerned that small 
member states would lose influence, and that jobs would be relocated to countries where 
labour was  cheaper.  Some even feared  a loss  of language,  culture,  and  identity. Finally, 
there  was  a feeling  that the  Netherlands  was  paying  too  much  to  the EU,  and  that the 
Constitution  would  not increase  prosperity  (Aarts  and Van  Der  Kolk,  2006;  Nijeboer, 
2005).  Not  surprisingly,  voters  for  the  parties  that  opposed  the  treaty  overwhelmingly 
rejected  the  Constitution,  but Labour  voters  also  voted  strongly  against,  while  Liberal 
and  CDA  voters  were  fairly  evenly  split.  Only  supporters  of D66  turned  out  a  clear 
majority favouring ratification (Aarts and Van Der Kolk, 2006, p. 246). 

Though the referendum had been advisory,  most parties had committed themselves to 
accepting the result, and with such a clear message, the ratification was not even put to  a 
vote in  Parliament.  The government used  the  referendum result to  obtain  a reduction  in 
the Dutch contribution to the EU, and it pushed for the new Treaty of Lisbon, from which 
every reference to  a constitution was removed and in which subsidiarity was given more 
prominence. This was  sufficient for the Labour Party,  now in government, to  drop its ear(cid:173)
lier insistence on  a new  referendum.  Somewhat surprisingly,  forgoing  a new referendum 
has  not led to  an outcry among the electorate. Just as  the first shock of 2002,  the  second 
shock does not seem to have led to any long-lasting change of the political system. 

262  Governance and Politics of the Netherlands 

This  diagnosis  of a dramatic Dutch turnaround with  regard to  European integra(cid:173)
tion is an exaggeration, however. Actually,  the reputation for being among the most 
enthusiastic  proponents  of integration  is  based  on  only  a  relatively  short  period: 
from  1973  to  1991.  After  the  Second  World  War,  the  importance  of  Germany 
with its  spectacular recovery,  for  the Dutch  economy constituted a new  reality  tha~ 
the  Netherlands  was  reluctant  to  accept  (Segers,  2013).  When  the  European  Coal 
and  Steel  Community  (ECSC)  was  set  up,  the  Dutch  were  taken  by  surprise  and 
strongly  objected  to  a  supranational  authority,  whereas  supranationality  was  later 
to  become  one  of the  characteristic  Dutch  desires  in  Brussels.  Another  source  of 
hesitation  was  even  more  curious  - fear  by  all  major  parties  except  the  Catholic 
KVP  of a  papist  Europe.  This  fear  even  had  an  impact  on  the  composition of the 
1952-56 cabinet. In Chapter 2 we noted that in  1952 the portfolio of Foreign Affairs 
fell  to  the  KVP,  but that  the  other parties balked at  the  prospect of all  the  Foreign 
Ministers in the European Community being Catholic. As  a compromise, a non-par(cid:173)
tisan Minister of Foreign Affairs,  the  banker Johan  Willem Beyen,  was  appointed, 
and the Catholic diplomat Joseph Luns became Minister without Portfolio, with the 
right  to  call  himself Foreign  Minister  when  abroad.  Ironically,  it  was  the  Catholic 
Luns  who  turned  out  to  be  a  staunch  Atlanticist,  and  Beyen  who  became  one  of 
the  founding  fathers  of the  European  Community  (Mallinson,  2010,  pp.  205-7). 
The  latter  succeeded,  together  with  Belgium's  Minister  of Foreign  Affairs,  Paul(cid:173)
Henri Spaak, in laying the foundation of the EC Treaty after attempts at a European 
Defence Community and a European Political Community had foundered in 1954. 

Beyen  was  more  enthusiastic  about  European  integration  than  most  of  his 
colleagues  in  the  Dutch  government.  Once  initial  hesitations  about  a  Vatican 
conspiracy  had  been  overcome,  two  important  reservations  about  European  inte(cid:173)
gration  remained:  a rejection  of domination  by  one  or more  of the  larger member 
states, and a continued emphasis on Atlantic cooperation in the areas of defence and 
foreign  policy.  The fear  of a directorate  of larger countries  - Germany,  or  a Fran(cid:173)
co-German  coalition - made  the  Dutch  into  proponents  of widening  the  Commu(cid:173)
nity  by  including  more  countries,  but it was  translated primarily into  proposals  to 
strengthen  the  supranational  institutions  of the  Community:  the  Commission,  the 
Court, and the European Parliament. 

This  emphasis  on  supranationalism  is  sometimes  mistaken  for  a  sign  of enthu(cid:173)

siastic  support  for  European  integration.  Paradoxically,  it  was  actually  a  form  of 
protection  of national  interests.  Because  of his  supranationalist  attitude,  a  Dutch 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  was  once  criticized  by  the  opposition  as  'a  covert 
apostle of national sovereignty'  (quoted in  Hellema,  1995,  p.  321).  Countries such 
as  the  Netherlands,  it  was  felt,  are  too  small  to  exert  influence  in  an  intergovern(cid:173)
mental  power  game. Supranational  bodies,  on  the  other hand, are  likely  to  pursue 
pan-European interests, and such interests  are deemed to  be more compatible with 
Dutch  interests  than  are  specific  German, French,  or  even  British,  interests.  Thus 
supranationalism  became  a  preoccupation  of the  Dutch  within  Europe,  from  the 
near-unanimous  motion  in  the  Second  Chamber  to  transfer  powers  to  suprana(cid:173)
tionalist  institutions  in  1948,  to  the  conflict  in  1991  between  the  Netherlands  as 

-----

Foreign Policy  263 

temporary  chair  of the  EU  and  most  other  member  states  regarding  supranation(cid:173)
alist  tendencies  in  a  Dutch  draft  for  the  Maastricht Treaty. The Dutch  support for 
a directly  elected European Parliament with  real  powers  is  another example  of the 
supranationalist preference. 

Officially,  the  Dutch  have  always  worried  about  the  'European  democratic 
deficit':  decision-making  increasingly  shifts  to  Brussels,  where  it  is  outside  the 
purview  of national  Parliaments  without  similar  scrutiny  by  the  European  Parlia(cid:173)
ment.  This  gap  in  democratic  accountability should be filled  by  a competent Euro(cid:173)
pean  Parliament.  The  introduction  of direct  elections  to  the  European  Parliament, 
first  held  in  1979,  was  celebrated  as  a  Dutch  victory  for  democracy.  Turnout  for 
these  elections  was  low  everywhere, but it was  particularly low  in  the Netherlands 
(see  Chapter 4).  This  has  not  helped  much  in  giving  the  supranational  Parliament 
democratic  legitimacy, but the  low turnout has only  strengthened the resolve of the 
Dutch  government to push for more powers  for  the  European Parliament, claiming 
that the low turnout was caused by a reluctance to vote for a third-rate legislature. It 
is  difficult to  ascertain to  what degree  this  concern for European democracy is  real, 
or whether it has  merely served as  a flag  of convenience under which to  strengthen 
the supranational character of the Community. 

Whichever  explanation  is  the  correct  one,  it  should  be  emphasized  that  the 
campaign  for  supranationalism  has  generally  taken  second  place  to  the  Atlantic 
orientation  in  Dutch  European  policy.  The  Dutch  attitude  is  epitomized  by  Foreign 
Minister  Joseph  Luns'  finest  hour:  his  'no'  to  Charles  de  Gaulle's  aspirations  in 
1961- 2. In 1960, the French President announced his proposals for a European polit(cid:173)
ical  union,  which  included  taking  over  some  of  NATO's  military  responsibilities, 
and  in  which  European  institutions would  be  controlled firmly  by  intergovernmental 
bodies. Because France was  the only nuclear power within the Europe of the original 
six  member  states,  and  De  Gaulle's suggestion  that  the  new  political  union's secre(cid:173)
tariat  would  be  located  in  Paris, provided  sufficient  fuel  for  concerns  of a  Gaullist 
Europe. This anxiety, the lack of supranational elements in the proposal, and the chal(cid:173)
lenge  to America's leadership  of the  alliance by  the formation  of a French-led Euro(cid:173)
pean defence  bloc  within NATO,  all  ran counter to  established Dutch foreign  policy 
precepts. All other member states apart from the Netherlands agreed to underwrite the 
French  plans.  Luns  demanded  that  the  political  union  should  not  affect  NATO,  and 
that it should develop  supranational institutions.  He  was  willing to  drop these condi(cid:173)
tions, however, provided that the United Kingdom be included. 

This  last  element,  which  became  known  as  the  Dutch  Prealable  Anglais,  is 
interesting,  since it shows  that,  for  the  Netherlands, Atlanticism took  priority  over 
supranationalism. Because  of its  special  relationship  with  the  USA, British  acces(cid:173)
sion  to  the Community would provide the Dutch with a powerful ally in promoting 
an  Atlantic  orientation  within  the  EU.  At  the  same  time,  it  was  well-known 
that  the  British  were  (and  still  are)  exceedingly  wary  of transferring  any  of their 
national  sovereignty  to  a supranational organization. The Dutch could not hope to 
find  support  for  their plans  from  British  membership  of the  community. After  the 
inconclusive  1961  summit,  the Dutch  were  gradually  forced  to  accept compromise 

268  Governance and Politics of the Netherlands 

announced  that  the  Minister  for  Development  Cooperation  would  also  be  the 
Minister for  International Trade,  to  emphasize  that the  two  should  be  interrelated. 
In recent decades,  bilateral aid has  been concentrated,  both in terms  of the number 
of receiving countries (36, primarily in Africa) and in terms of the types of projects 
(water management, food,  security and the rule of law,  and public health and rights 
regarding sexuality). 

Since  the  1990s,  however,  development  aid  itself  has  become  controversial 
(Malcontent, 2011). Economic growth has made some recipients of Dutch aid, such 
as  Indonesia,  so rich that continued aid seems unnecessary. The effectiveness of the 
aid  given  is  increasingly  called  into  question,  and  potentially  negative  side effects 
such as  increasing corruption are mentioned.  Others wonder whether the budget for 
development  aid  should remain untouched  in  the  government's  budget cutbacks to 
reduce the size of the collective sector (Chapter 9).  The Freedom Party opposes all 
development  aid  with  the  exception  of emergency  relief,  and  the  Liberals  seek  to 
reduce the percentage of GDP devoted to  development aid  to  the  average of the  15 
richest countries  in  the  eurozone (currently 0.44 per cent).  On the  other side of the 
political  spectrum,  Labour and  other  parties  on  the  left  defend  the  current 0.8  per 
cent benchmark. The fust result of the fight over the budget for development aid has 
been that it has  become  'diluted'  - for  example,  by  using  it to  support Central and 
Eastern European countries,  or to  help finance  peace-keeping operations.  Recently, 
the  aid  budget has  been  reduced  to  0.7  per cent of GDP.  From  2005  to  2008,  the 
Netherlands ranked highest on the Commitment to Development Index of the inde(cid:173)
pendent  Center  for  Global  Development  (CGD),  primarily  because  of the  Dutch 
budget  for  development  aid.  Since  then  it has  slipped  (in  small  part  also  because 
of a  different  method for  calculating  the  index)  to  sixth  place  in  2012  (Center for 
Global  Development,  2013).  Some recent  governments  have  given  the  portfolio of 
Development Cooperation to  a junior minister (Balkenende I; Rutte I). 

The  protection  of human  rights  is  an  official  goal  of Dutch foreign  policy,  and 
since 1999 the Netherlands has been one of the few  countries with a special roving 
Ambassador  for  Human  Rights. Prominent Dutch  politicians  have  been  appointed 
as  the UN's High Commissioner for Refugees (former journalist and minister Gerrit 
Jan  Van  Reuven  Goedhart  in  1951,  and  former  Prime  Minister  Ruud  Lubbers  in 
2000)  and  as  The  Organization  for  Security  and  Co-operation  in  Europe  (OSCE) 
High  Commissioner  for  Minorities  (former  Minister  of Foreign Affairs,  Max  Van 
Der Stoel in  1994). A prominent example of Dutch concern over human rights is its 
relationship with South Africa during apartheid.  Because of its historical links to the 
Boers in South Africa, the Netherlands voted in  1961  against expelling the country 
from  the UN for  its  policy of apartheid,  but  subsequently  the  Dutch became rather 
more  critical  of the  apartheid  regime. After  1963,  the  Netherlands  complied  with 
a  non-mandatory  embargo  on  military  supplies  to  South Africa. The issue  became 
politicized during the Van Agt I government (1977-81). In 1979, a left-wing faction 
of the  CDA  twice  introduced  a  parliamentary  motion  demanding  a  unilateral  oil 
embargo of South Africa if a European-wide embargo could not be achieved.  Both 
motions received majority support, but the government ignored the first and refused 

270  Governance and Politics of the Netherlands 

'the biggest single  mass  murder  in  Europe since World War  II'  (Holbrooke,  199S 

p. 69)  had  occurred on  their  watch. A  later study  by  the  Netherlands  Institute fo; 

War  Documentation  and  a Parliamentary Inquiry  were  highly  critical of the  Dutch 
government's  decision  to  send  Dutchbat  to  Srebrenica  without  a  clear  mandate 
without adequate armaments, without guarantees of air support, and without anothe; 
country  taking  over  after  the  agreed period of Dutch  engagement  had  ended.  The 
experience of Srebrenica has made the Dutch government reluctant to join UN oper(cid:173)
ations whenever there is a high risk of getting involved in actual hostilities. In such 
situations,  the preferred arrangement is now  a UN mandate implemented by NATO 
or  the  EU,  such  as  NATO's  ISAF  (International  Security  Assistance  Force)  in 
Afghanistan and the EU's mission in Chad and the Central African Republic. Since 
'Srebrenica',  the  protocol  for  government  decision-making  about  joining  inter(cid:173)
national  operations  has  been  tightened,  and  a  new  article  in  the  Constitution  now 
demands that Parliament should be involved (without a formal parliamentary veto). 
This has  had the  unintended consequence of politicizing decisions to  deploy Dutch 
troops abroad (see Box 10.1). 

The Domestication of Dutch Foreign Policy 

Staunch  Atlanticism  in  security  matters,  cautious  Europeanization  to  profit  from 
Germany's  economic  growth,  and  an  active  role  in  the  UN  and  in  development 
cooperation to  satisfy  its  moral  ambitions:  if Dutch foreign  policy  could ever have 
been characterized so simply, it is  no longer the case. The international environment 
has changed since the end of the  Cold War,  and the  Netherlands is  slowly adapting 
to  these  changes,  as  are  other  countries.  For  the  Netherlands,  an  additional  adap(cid:173)
tation  may  be  to  its  own  size. In  his  overview  of the  international  position of the 
Netherlands,  Thomas R.  Rochon  argues  that its  proud  legacy  of once  having  been 
one  of the  world's  great  powers,  overseeing  a  global  trading  empire,  'accounts  at 
least in part for the Dutch tendency  to  take a more active stance in the international 
system than is  typical of other small nations'  (Rochon,  1999, p. 266).  Between the 
end  of the  Second World War  and  the  end  of the  Cold War,  the  international  situ(cid:173)
ation  compensated for  the  decrease in influence of the  Netherlands  because of the 
loss  of its  colonies.  For a long  time  the  UK remained  outside  the  EU,  and France 
militarily outside NATO,  giving the Netherlands a crucial role representing Atlantic 
(and  US)  interests  within  the  EU  when  the  latter  still  consisted  of only  six  coun(cid:173)
tries. Now,  strictly  numerically  speaking,  the Netherlands  sees  its  influence diluted 
by the enlargements of both EU and NATO.  More important, the UK has become a 
member of the EU and,  after De  Gaulle,  French foreign  policy  is  less  'exception(cid:173)
alist'  even  with  respect  to  NATO.  More  than  half a  century  after  the  end  of the 
Second World War,  a reunified Germany is  no  longer shy about using  its  influence 
or about sending its troops abroad. Adjusting Dutch foreign policy ambitions to  the 
real  size  of its  influence is  not yet complete. A  recent overview concludes  that the 
country is  still  'punching above  its  weight',  assuming the  role of a moral-guide in 

