•  Types	  of	  study	  

Self	  Study	  2	  

Summary:	  „Introduction	  to	  research	  methods	  in	  psychology“	  	  
(Howitt,	  D.,	  Cramer,	  D.	  2011)	  

	  
	  
Aims	  and	  hypotheses	  in	  research	  (pp.	  25-­‐39)	  
	  
o  Descriptive	  or	  exploratory	  studies	  
!  Describing	  the	  in	  detail	  the	  characteristics	  and	  features	  of	  the	  in	  
thing	  in	  question	  
!  Case	  studies	  
!  Content	  analysis	  
o  Evaluation	  of	  outcome	  studies	  
!  Testing	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  an	  intervention	  "	  e.g.	  of	  psycho-­‐
therapeutic	  treatments	  
!  Randomized	  controlled	  trials	  
o  Meta-­‐analytic	  studies	  
of the range of studies which have investigated a particular topic	  
	  

!  Has the aim of statistically summarising and analysing the results 

•  Aims	  of	  research	  

•  Four types of hypothesis 

! 

o  The researcher needs to have a coherent understanding of what purposes 
o  Presenting the aims of their studies with enough clarity and expaning its 

the research will serve and how likely it is to serve these purposes. 
relevance." What can the researcher contribute? 
 

o  Verbs	  that	  allude	  to	  causality:	  	  
Influences,	  affects,	  leads	  to,	  results	  in,	  has	  an	  effect	  on,	  brings	  
about,	  causes	  	  
o  Direction,	  hypotheses	  and	  statistical	  analysis	  
!  Null	  hypothesis	  (there	  is	  no	  relationship	  between	  the	  variables)	  and	  
alternate	  hypothesis	  (there	  is	  a	  relationship)	  "	  Since we are dealing 
null hypothesis. 	  
testing is for testing non-directional hypotheses.	  
o  Four	  possible	  combinations:	  
!  Causal	  and	  directional	  
!  Non-­‐causal	  and	  directional	  
!  Causal	  and	  non-­‐directional	  
!  Non-­‐causal	  and	  non-­‐directional	  

with probabilities, we do not say that we have proven the hypothesis or 
!  One-tailed testing is testing a directional hypothesis whereas two-tailed 

	  	  	  	  	  	  

