Narrative Exposure Therapy 

for the Treatment of Traumatized 

Children and Adolescents (KidNET): 

From Neurocognitive Theory 

to  Field Intervention 

Frank Neuner, PhD*, Claudia Catani, PhD, 
Martina Ruf,  MA,  Elisabeth Schauer, PhD, 
Maggie  Schauer, PhD, Thomas Elbert, PhD 

Department of Psychology,  University  of Konstanz,  Box D25,  D-78457 Konstanz,  Germany 

Current evidence  and  practice 

Violence against children, including maltreatment at home, sexual abuse, 
and  child  labor,  are  common  phenomena  worldwide.  In  addition,  many 
children  are  affected  by  violence  caused  by  political  conflicts,  unrest,  and 
war. Current wars are characterized by high levels of deliberate and system(cid:173)
atic  violence  against  the  civilian  population  [1],  including  victimization  of 
women and children.  More than 30  countries are affected  by current wars, 
and the populations of many now peaceful countries suffer from the after(cid:173)
maths of a  recent armed conflict.  In addition,  the number and intensity  of 
environmental disasters is increasing. Environmental disasters mainly affect 
low-income  countries  with  poor  facilities  for  an  adequate  emergency 
response  [2].  In  some  regions,  war  and  environmental  disaster  co-occur 
[3],  causing  severe  acute  emergencies  and  a  long-lasting  mental  health 
impairment in the population. 

Although  children  can  be  astonishingly  resilient  even  in  face  of severe 
disasters  and atrocities,  high levels  of traumatic events increase the risk  of 
developmental  difficulties  and  psychologic  disorders.  Many  studies  have 
shown  increased  rates  of mental  disorders  in  children  affected  by war  [4]. 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Ministry  of Science,  Research  and  the  Arts  of Baden(cid:173)

Wiirttemberg, the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, and the European Refugee Fund. 

*  Corresponding author. 
E-mail address:frank.neuner@uni-konstanz.de (F.  Neuner). 

