The Case Brief

A “case brief” is a method for taking organized notes on a “case,” which is how lawyers often refer to a
written court opinion. There are probably as many different possible case brief formats as there are 
lawyers. This format is meant only to be a sample to teach you how case briefs work, and how some 
typical sections within case briefs work. It is not meant to identify the “one perfect case brief format.” 
The descriptions of each element in the format are meant to provide only a basic overview.

Caption – simply set forth the name of the case, the court in which it was heard, and the citation
• EXAMPLE: Hammontree v. Jenner, California Court of Appeals, 20 Cal.App.3d 528, 97 

Cal.Rptr. 739 (1971).

• Citation: The citation is information about the case that the reader can use to find the case in a 

library or database like Westlaw, and to assess the relevance of the opinion to future cases. 

• Parties: the “name of case” contains the names of the parties involved in the case. In a criminal

case, one of the parties is always the state. In civil cases the parties are private individuals or 
entities.

Procedural History - How did this case advance through the court system to the point it is now? That 
is, who sued who, and on what basis? If this is a criminal case, what charges were filed against the 
defendant? If it is a civil case, what was the cause of action (e.g. negligence)?  In either kind of case, 
have any motions been made and ruled on (e.g. Motion for Summary Judgment, Motion for Directed 
Verdict)? Was the case decided by a jury or judge? What was the precise decision that was made at the 
trial court? That is, in a civil case, did the court find in favor of the plaintiff or the defendant? In a 
criminal case, did the court find that the defendant was guilty or not guilty? Was there another appellate
decision after the trial court and before this court? What specifically did that court rule?

Facts:  The facts you include in your fact section will vary depending on the issues before the court in 
the case you are reading. Your facts will generally include the “legally significant facts” and the 
“relevant background facts.” Legally significant facts: Facts which, if they were different, might mean 
that the outcome of the case would be different. Relevant background facts: Facts that help you 
understand, organize, or think about the legally significant facts. HINT: the facts section of a case is 
often extensive and contains facts that are not terribly important to your case brief. To determine what 
are important facts, complete this part of your case brief after reading the entire case. Relevant facts are
often discussed by the court later in the case as part of its analysis. Facts that appear in the analysis are 
usually significant facts.

Issue(s): In this section, identify the legal question(s) that the court is answering. Generally, a formal 
issue statement will include 3 elements: (1) the legal context (usually the area of law is relevant, and 
maybe a particular statute or other enacted law), (2) the narrow legal question (a yes or no question), 
and (3) the factual context. A less formal issue statement will just identify the narrow legal question and
perhaps some facts. Thus, a formal issue statement might be: “Under Ohio’s dog owner liability statute,
which allows an owner to escape liability for a dog’s bite if the victim was ‘committing a trespass or 
other criminal offense,’ [legal context] can an owner avoid liability [narrow legal question] if the victim
was committing a civil trespass when he was bitten? [facts]” A less formal issue statement might say, 
e.g., “Can a dog owner avoid liability for his dog’s bite if the victim was committing a civil trespass 
when he was bitten?”

Holding: Normally, use of the word “holding” means “the rule of the case” – in other words, the legal 
rule in the context of the facts of this case. NOTE – this is what we are looking for when we read a 

