Methodological nationalism and beyond: 
nation-state building, migration and the  

social sciences 

ANDREAS WIMMER AND NINA GLICK SCHILLER 

Abstract  Methodological  nationalism  is  understood  as  the  assumption  that  the 
nation/state/society is the natural social and political form of the modern world. We 
distinguish three modes of methodological nationalism that have characterized main-
stream social science, and then show how these have influenced research on migra-
tion. We discover parallels between nationalist thinking and the conceptualization of 
migration in postwar social sciences. In a historical tour d’horizon, we show that this 
mainstream concept has developed in close interaction with nation-state building pro-
cesses in the West and the role that immigration and integration policies have played 
within them. The shift towards a study of ‘transnational communities’ – the last phase 
in this process – was more a consequence of an epistemic move away from methodo-
logical nationalism than of the appearance of new objects of observation. The article 
concludes by recommending new concepts for analysis that, on the one hand, are not 
coloured  by  methodological  nationalism  and,  on  the  other  hand,  go  beyond  the 
fluidism of much contemporary social theory. 

 
After the first flurry of confusion about the nature and extent of contemporary pro-
cesses  of  globalization,  social  scientists  moved  beyond  rhetorical  generalities  about 
the decline of the nation-state and began to examine the ways in which nation-states 
are  currently  being  reconfigured  rather  than  demolished.  That  nation-states  and 
nationalism  are  compatible  with  globalization  was  made  all  too  obvious.  We  wit-
nessed the flouring of nationalism and the restructuring of a whole range of new states 
in  Eastern  Europe  along  national  lines  in  the  midst  of  growing  global  interconnec-
tions. The concomitance of these processes provides us with an intellectual opening to 
think about the limitations of our conceptual apparatus. It has become easier to under-
stand that it is because we have come to take for granted a world divided into discrete 
and  autonomous  nation-states  that  we  see  nation-state  building  and  global  inter-
connections  as  contradictory.  The  next  step  is  to  analyse  how  the  concept  of  the 
nation-state  has  and  still  does  influence  past  and  current  thinking  in  the  social 
sciences, including our thinking about transnational migration. 

It is our aim in this article to move in this direction by exploring the intellectual 
potential of two hypotheses. We demonstrate that nation-state building processes have 
fundamentally shaped the ways immigration has been perceived and received. These 
perceptions have in turn influenced, though not completely determined, social science 

Global Networks 2, 4 (2002) 301–334. ISSN 1470–2266 
© 2002 Andreas Wimmer and Nina Glick Schiller 

301 

