and form the base conditions governing
representation in the various genres. The
phenomenology of the chronotope thus
constitutes a kind of formal horizon, in
which narrative temporality and spatial rela-
tions are mutually involved with chance
rather than logical consequence. In chron-
otopic analysis, according to Bakhtin, nei-
ther time nor space is privileged, as one or the
other often is in literary criticism; for him,
the two are always seen as interdependent.
An unusual aspect of Bakhtin’s view of
literary history is that he projects the novel
genre backward in time, ﬁnding novelistic
roots in both classical Greek and Roman
precursors. Bakhtin’s discussions of
the
interworkings of time, space, and funda-
mental principles such as causality in these
early literary narratives are fascinating and
suggestive. It is unfortunate, however, that
his exploration of the chronotope is illus-
trated by a number of obscure narratives for
which he is attempting, at the same time, to
establish an original generic status. On the
other hand, his innovations as a classicist,
bringing new attention to genres such as the
symposium and the Menippean satire, as
precursors of the novel, no doubt inﬂuenced
his development of the concepts of hetero-
glossia, dialogism, and polyphony in the
novel. But the idea of the chronotope, linked
as it is to ﬁctional genres, has provided
contemporary critics with a useful tool of
analysis that was not previously available.

SEE ALSO: Bakhtin, M. M.; Blanchot,
Maurice; Carnival/Carnivalesque;
Deconstruction; Derrida, Jacques; Marxism;
Other/Alterity; Phenomenology; Poulet,
Georges

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The Dialogic Imagination:
Four Essays (ed. M. Holquist; trans. C. Emerson

D I S C O U R S E 159

& M. Holquist). Austin: University of Texas
Press. (Original work published 1975.)

Bakhtin, M. M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky’s
Poetics (ed. and trans. C. Emerson). Minne-
apolis: University of Minnesota Press. (Original
work published 1929.)

Clark, K., & Holquist, M. (1984). Mikhail Bakhtin.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Holquist, M. (1990). Dialogism: Bakhtin and His

World. London: Routledge.

Morson, G. S., & Emerson, C. (1990). Mikhail
Bakhtin: Creation of a Prosaics. Stanford: Stan-
ford University Press.

Todorov, T. (1984). Mikhail Bakhtin: The Dialogical
Principle (trans. W. Godzich). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.

Discourse
YASSER MUNIF

The term “discourse” refers to a systematic
and relational sequence of meaningful state-
ments (speech and text) and semiotic ele-
ments (signs and symbols) that inﬂuence
practices and give expression to the values,
behaviors, and worldviews of social groups.
Historically, the concept was in use in the
sixteenth century to describe the practice
of speaking or writing at length about
a particular theme. In everyday language,
the term is often used casually to imply
a structured argument about a particular
theme. The modern genealogy of the con-
cept, however, goes back to the work of
Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure and
includes pre-eminent poststructuralist the-
orists like Michel Foucault. For mainstream
linguistics, highly indebted to Saussure, the
focus is on the analysis of the internal
mechanisms of language in use. In contrast,
according to the Foucauldian perspective,
which tends to be more inﬂuential in cul-
tural studies and literary theory, the empha-
sis is on examining the impact of discourse
on the social sphere.

In the 1900s, Ferdinand de Saussure
developed a linguistic theory that differed

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

