A R T I C L E S

A critical period for auditory thalamocortical connectivity
Tania Rinaldi Barkat1, Daniel B Polley2 & Takao K Hensch1

Neural circuits are shaped by experience during periods of heightened brain plasticity in early postnatal life. Exposure to acoustic 
features produces age-dependent changes through largely unresolved cellular mechanisms and sites of origin. We isolated the 
refinement of auditory thalamocortical connectivity by in vivo recordings and day-by-day voltage-sensitive dye imaging in an acute 
brain slice preparation. Passive tone-rearing modified response strength and topography in mouse primary auditory cortex (A1) 
during a brief, 3-d window, but did not alter tonotopic maps in the thalamus. Gene-targeted deletion of a forebrain-specific cell-
adhesion molecule (Icam5) accelerated plasticity in this critical period. Consistent with its normal role of slowing spinogenesis, 
loss of Icam5 induced precocious stubby spine maturation on pyramidal cell dendrites in neocortical layer 4 (L4), identifying a 
primary locus of change for the tonotopic plasticity. The evolving postnatal connectivity between thalamus and cortex in the days 
following hearing onset may therefore determine a critical period for auditory processing.

Neural circuits are shaped by experience during periods of heightened 
brain plasticity in early life1,2. Children raised in an English-speaking envi-
ronment easily distinguish between the phonemes /la/ and /ra/, whereas 
those growing up in Japan find it increasingly difficult3. Passive exposure 
of young rodents to a variety of sound features reveals a cascading series 
of developmental windows that open and close shortly after hearing onset 
to define the persistent and specific influences of early experience on the 
functional organization of auditory cortex4–6. The underlying sites of 
plasticity along the auditory pathway, as well as potential mechanisms 
engaged during such critical periods, remain unknown.

Motivated  by  the  well  known  binocular  interactions  shaped  by 
experience in developing visual cortex7–9, we used in vivo neurophysi-
ological recordings to determine whether mouse A1 also exhibits a 
critical period for tonotopic map plasticity induced through passive 
tone exposure, and whether such plasticity is present in the auditory 
thalamus (ventral medial geniculate body, MGBv). We then isolated 
the  connection  between  MGBv  and  primary  auditory  cortex  (A1)  
(ref. 10) in an acute brain slice preparation11 and used voltage-sensitive 
dye imaging (VSDI) techniques in vitro. We mapped A1 responses to 
electrical stimulation of discrete sites in MGBv across early postnatal 
days (P8–20), following tone-rearing or gene manipulation. Our results 
reveal a critical period for acoustically driven topographic plasticity at 
thalamocortical connections in mouse A1.

RESULTS
Tone exposure modifies tonotopic maps in A1, but not MGBv
The auditory system is tonotopically organized10 such that tones of 
similar frequency activate neighboring neurons at each station along 
the pathway. Given that rats show experience-dependent tonotopic map 
reorganization following passive tone exposure during the second post-
natal week2,12, we first used high-density in vivo mapping to delineate 
A1 tonotopy in young adult mice13 that were reared either in typical 
acoustic environments (Fig. 1a) or in the presence of pulsed 7-kHz tone 

pips from P11 to P15 (Fig. 1b) or P16 to P20 (Fig. 1c). Comparison of 
representative tonal receptive fields drawn from caudal, intermediate 
and rostral map locations (Fig. 1d) revealed that tone-rearing from P11 
to P15, but not P16 to P20, was sufficient to shift A1 best frequencies 
toward the 7-kHz exposure frequency (P11–15 versus exposure, n = 5  
mice and 93 sites for each group, P = 0.003; P16–20, 4 mice and 64 sites 
versus no exposure, P = 1.0, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test; Fig. 1e). On 
closer inspection, the expansion of best frequency representations near 
the exposure frequency was attributable to topographically specific real-
location of best frequencies in caudal and intermediate regions of the 
tonotopic map proximal to where 7 kHz is normally represented, rather 
than a shift in more rostral map areas that retain normal tuning to higher 
frequencies (P = 0.009, 0.04 and 0.14 for P11–15 versus no exposure at 
caudal, mid and rostral locations, respectively, t test; Fig. 1f,g).

To determine whether remapping in A1 could be explained by a 
shifted frequency representation in the principal subcortical input 
source, we also examined best frequency distributions in the MGBv. 
We inserted a multichannel silicon probe at an angle that matched 
the plane of section used in subsequent thalamocortical slice experi-
ments13 (Fig. 2a). This approach allowed us to sample the low-to-
high,  lateral-to-medial  best  frequency  gradient  in  MGBv  in  vivo 
(Fig. 2b) with a comparable multi-unit signal-to-noise ratio as in 
our A1 recordings (Fig. 2c) while excluding recordings from audi-
tory areas medial to MGBv (Fig. 2d and Online Methods). Although 
7-kHz rearing from P11–15 induced a significant shift in A1 maps 
(Fig. 1), we found no evidence for shifts in overall best frequency 
distributions in MGBv (P11–15, n = 5 mice and 151 sites versus no 
exposure, n = 4 mice and 101 sites; P = 0.99, Kolmogorov-Smirnov 
test; Fig. 2e) or differences in mean best frequency at lateral (50 (cid:77)m  
into MGBv), more medial (200 (cid:77)m into MGBv) or across all recording  
sites (P = 0.44, 0.18 and 0.91 at lateral, medial and overall locations, 
respectively, t test; Fig. 2f). In contrast, other auditory receptive  
field changes, such as best frequency–specific reductions in tuning  

1Center for Brain Science, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 2Eaton-Peabody Laboratory, 
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Department of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence should be 
addressed to T.K.H. (hensch@mcb.harvard.edu).

Received 1 April; accepted 6 June; published online 31 July 2011; doi:10.1038/nn.2882

NATURE NEUROSCIENCE  VOLUME 14 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2011 

1189

© 2011 Nature America, Inc.  All rights reserved.© 2011 Nature America, Inc.  All rights reserved.