Neuron, Vol. 35, 1167–1175, September 12, 2002, Copyright 2002 by Cell Press

Brain Areas Active during Visual
Perception of Biological Motion

Emily D. Grossman1 and Randolph Blake
Vanderbilt Vision Research Center/Department

of Psychology

Vanderbilt University
Nashville, Tennessee 37203

Summary

Theories of vision posit that form and motion are rep-
resented by neural mechanisms segregated into func-
tionally and anatomically distinct pathways. Using
point-light animations of biological motion, we exam-
ine the extent to which form and motion pathways are
mutually involved in perceiving figures depicted by the
spatio-temporal integration of local motion compo-
nents. Previous work discloses that viewing biological
motion selectively activates a region on the posterior
superior temporal sulcus (STSp). Here we report that
the occipital and fusiform face areas (OFA and FFA)
also contain neural signals capable of differentiating
biological from nonbiological motion. EBA and LOC,
although involved in perception of human form, do not
contain neural signals selective for biological motion.
Our results suggest that a network of distributed neu-
ral areas in the form and motion pathways underlie
the perception of biological motion.

Introduction

It is widely believed that primate vision comprises multi-
ple visual areas organized into hierarchical pathways
specialized for registering information about particular
aspects of the visual scene (Felleman and Van Essen,
1991). Over the years, this overarching model has taken
different forms, with some versions emphasizing distinc-
tions between “sustained” and “transient” aspects of
vision (Breitmeyer and Ganz, 1976; Kulikowski and Tol-
hurst, 1973), others distinguishing “color” and “broad-
band” channels (Schiller et al., 1990), and still others
focusing on distinctions between perceiving objects and
acting upon objects (Goodale and Humphrey, 1998). One
currently popular version of this theory posits a so-called
“motion” pathway extending into more dorsal aspects
of extrastriate and posterior parietal cortex, specialized
for registering information about the locations of objects
and their movements within the visual scene, and an
“object” stream pathway in ventral cortex involved in
specifying information about the shapes and identities
of visual objects (Ungerleider and Mishkin, 1982; Living-
stone and Hubel, 1987). This particular version of the
multiple pathway model has sparked a wealth of re-
search aimed at testing the notion of object-grounded
and motion-grounded neural systems (Haxby et al.,
1991; Tanaka, 1996; Bradley et al., 1998; Kourtzi and
Kanwisher, 2000).

While not disputing the notion of object-based and

1Correspondence: e.grossman@vanderbilt.edu

motion-based processing streams, several recent neu-
ral imaging studies have sought to determine the extent
to which neural representations of objects are distrib-
uted throughout visual cortex. Sereno et al. (2002) found
evidence for cue-invariant, 3D shape representations in
multiple brain areas spanning object and motion path-
ways in anesthetized monkeys. Haxby et al. (2001) found
that the distribution of brain activity associated with
viewing faces and objects was widespread within ven-
tral temporal cortex, leading these authors to downplay
the importance of highly specialized neural areas in ob-
ject recognition. We, too, have recently become inter-
ested in the question of distributed neural representa-
tions, in our case, representations associated with a
particularly salient class of motion-defined forms, i.e.,
biological motion. In this paper, we report results from
a brain imaging study that examines patterns of neural
activity within multiple brain areas implicated in visual
perception of bodies and body parts.

In these experiments, we have capitalized on a vivid,
remarkable example of motion-defined shape: Johans-
son’s “point-light” animation sequences (Johansson,
1973). These animations convey complex human activi-
ties using just a handful of dots placed on the joints
of the human body. Single static frames resemble a
meaningless cluster of dots portraying no hint of an
object, human or otherwise, but when shown in rapid
succession, these animated dots are grouped to create
the perception of a human form engaged in a readily
identified activity (Cutting et al., 1978; Ahlstro¨ m et al.,
1997; Neri et al., 1998; Mather et al., 1992). The compel-
ling sense of human form created by the spatio-temporal
integration of these local dot motions would seem to
imply that “object” and “motion” pathways are together
creating perception of an active person.

Brain imaging studies in humans have pinpointed a
region on the posterior superior temporal sulcus (STSp)
that is active when observers perceive biological motion
in point-light animations (Bonda et al., 1996; Howard et
al., 1996; Grossman et al., 2000; Vaina et al., 2001).
It seems reasonable to place STSp within the motion
pathway, based on its proximity to motion-responsive
areas MT and MST (Suneart et al., 1999); moreover,
STSp is far removed from ventral temporal cortex and,
by implication, brain areas involved in form perception.
Nonetheless, point-light animations portraying biologi-
cal motion create compelling impressions of a class of
recognizable objects, namely humans, so it is natural to
suppose that this unique type of structure from motion
also activates “object-selective” ventral stream mecha-
nisms. Thus while STSp may be selectively activated
when viewing biological motion perception, the entire
network of brain areas involved in registering all aspects
of these salient animations may extend to the form
pathway.

We have examined this supposition by isolating brain
areas generally believed to be involved in the perception
of objects, including human body parts, and then mea-
suring BOLD signals in those areas produced by viewing
biological motion sequences. These areas are: (1) the

