British Educational Research Journal
Vol. 40, No. 4, August 2014, pp. 699–717

DOI: 10.1002/berj.3108

Legitimating status: perceptions of
meritocracy and inequality among
undergraduates at an elite British university

Natasha Kumar Warikooa* and Christina Fuhrb
aHarvard University Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, USA; bUniversity of
Oxford, Department of Sociology, Oxford, UK

Given the frequent critiques of elite universities for admitting low numbers of state school graduates
and, more recently, British Afro-Caribbean students, how do students attending those universities
make meaning of the admissions process? Through an analysis of 46 one-on-one in-depth inter-
views with undergraduates attending Oxford University, we show that students believe in the fair-
ness of the admissions process, while lamenting the lack of opportunities for educational
advancement faced by some disadvantaged youth in British society. Despite their understanding
that many British youth do not have access to educational experiences that make Oxbridge an
attainable goal, most students do not support changes to make access more equitable across class or
racial/ethnic lines. This perspective, which legitimates the status students gain through matricula-
tion at an elite university, supports the maintenance of unequal access to an Oxford education
despite the advantages that education is known to confer to graduates. The findings demonstrate
elites acknowledging the disadvantages of particular groups in society without acknowledging their
own advantages in the same system. They do so by recognizing two elements of merit: (1) intelli-
gence, which most students assumed led to their own admission; and (2) cultivation of that intelli-
gence, which requires elite secondary schools and which most students see as disadvantaging
particular groups in society. In the paper we highlight differences in meaning-making between grad-
uates of grammar, comprehensive and private schools.

Modern western societies operate on the premise that status is achieved rather than
inherited. Meritocracy—a system in which rewards are distributed based on individ-
ual merit rather than, for example, inheritance or payment—serves to legitimate the
status hierarchy in modern industrial democracies, in contrast to the inherited and
coercive dominance of elites in traditional societies (Young, 1958; Weber, 1968;
Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977). Lipset and Bendix (1992) argue that social mobility in
fact characterizes modern industrial societies. The status attainment literature docu-
ments just how much social mobility takes place by showing that education level is
associated with adult earnings independent of parents’ level of education (Blau &
Duncan, 1967). Still, the degree to which individuals can actually change their social
status has been questioned by many (Bourdieu, 1984; Bowles & Gintis, 1976; Kara-
bel & Halsey, 1977). Michael Young, in the book that coined the term ‘meritocracy’
(1958), warned against a system in which elites use notions of ‘merit’ to reproduce
status and hence to sustain inequality in society.

*Corresponding author. 6 Appian Way, 4th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02138, United States. Email:
Natasha_warikoo@gse.harvard.edu

© 2013 British Educational Research Association

