The neuroscientific study of Altered States of 
Consciousness 
by Timo Torsten Schmidt 
 
Presentations 

(1)  The LSD-Driver’s License 

Literature: Metzinger, 2006 (article in GERMAN) 
Please shortly summarize the motivation behind the article: State what the discussion is about and 
make clear which pro and con arguments there are to give people access to psychedelic substances. 
Compare the situation with prescription drugs. Please present the idea of the LSD-Führerschein and 
what it is good for. Please discuss and critically evaluate problems that this approach solves and does 
not solve.  
Please choose how deep you want to go into details with each point and double-check with Timo that 
there is no to strong overlaps with the lecture – so you choose and the rest will be covered in the 
lecture. 
 

(2)  Harmfulness of Drugs: MDMA versus Horse riding  

Literature: Nutt, 2007 
In the Seminar session we will already discuss that drug laws are often not based on scientific 
evidence from the medical perspective. The motivation for the estimation of risks that go along with 
consuming drugs will therefore be motivated enough. In your presentation you should therefore focus 
on the details of David Nutt’s estimates of “harmfulness”. Please explain in detail how these scores are 
created and where the numbers for his calculations are derived from. Critically evaluate if this 
approach allows a fair comparison between such activities as horse riding and taking drugs. What are 
limitations of this approach and what implications does it have? 
 

(3)  Testable Hypotheses derived from the Predictive Coding framework  

Literature: Corlett&Frith, 2009  
The principle idea of the “Predictive Coding framework” will be introduced in the seminar session 
before your presentation. You should therefore only spend very short time on its introduction, and 
rather focus on how to apply it to hypotheses on particular drug effects. You can follow the arguments 
of the paper and finally end with an explanation of the summary table given in the paper. Can you make 
predictions for other drugs? What types of questions can one answer with such hypotheses? What do 
we learn from such principles and experiments? – Please communicate with the presenter of (4) to 
minimize the overlap between the presentations 
 

(4)  Sensory Deprivation: History and current research 

Literature: -  
There is a colorful history on research performed by people like Lilly dealing with sensory deprivation. 
Please summarize the motivation for those studies and the types of ASCs that are described. Present 
current techniques such as floating REST. As the previous presentation has been on the Predictive 
coding, please communicate with each other to minimize overlaps. Please derive some hypotheses on 
how the effects of floating can be explained in terms of brain function. Relate these to other research 
on e.g. mindfulness, meditation etc. 
 

(5)  Pekala’s Phenomenology of Consciousness Questionnaire 

Literature: Pekala-Book 
Please summarize the empirical approach that Pekala takes. Please describe the questionnaire that he 
as developed and summarize what type of ideas/concepts are reflected in the questionnaire. Critically 
evaluate in how far it can measure something “useful” and discuss in how far the dimensions/scales of 
the questionnaire might reflect basic aspects of consciousness, as claimed by Dittrich. 
 

(6)  Adolf Dittrich: Ethiology independent dimensions of consciousness  

Literature: Dittrich-Book 
Please summarize the idea by Adolf Dittrich of Ethiology independent dimensions of consciousness. 
Next describe the questionnaire and its structure. Please prepare a version of the questionnaire that 
everybody can get a copy. Please discuss in how far such a questionnaire can give valid results. 
Present example data from a research paper that applied the questionnaire and discuss in how far it 
allows to dissociate effects of e.g. Ketamine and Psilocybin 
 
 

