West European Politics,
Vol. 31, Nos. 1–2, 195 – 210, January–March 2008

The Changing Politics of Organised
Interests

PHILIPPE C. SCHMITTER

Since the mid-1970s, Western European politics have undergone signiﬁcant changes –
and this has been particularly marked in the arena of ‘interest politics’. In this article I
list some apodictic statements about these changes and speculate about their potential
explanations. To the extent that these descriptive generalisations have some accuracy
and that the potential explanations have some validity, we can then conclude that the
hegemony of political parties is declining. This is not to say that parties will be replaced
by either associations or movements. These three forms of representation are not locked
into a zero-sum game. In the past, they have grown together and supported each other.
Nothing says that they cannot also decline together in the present. What we can say,
however, is that there has been a generalised loosening of the links between interests and
organisations.

‘Interests’ in West European Politics – in practice or in the journal – purport
to explain everything and, therefore, they do not explain anything. Scratch
the surface of almost any WEP article and you will ﬁnd that the answer to
‘why did he or she act politically?’ will usually be: ‘because it was in his or
her interest to do so’. Ask ‘why did he or she have such an interest in the ﬁrst
place?’ or, even worse, ‘why did he or she think that such an action or policy
would eventually lead to the satisfaction of that interest?’ and you will only
rarely get a convincing answer.

Albert Hirschman (1977) has meticulously traced the origins of this
concept and how it became such an omnipresent explanation for political
action – despite the recentness of its usage and the ambiguity of its meaning.
He argues that its rise in the political lexicon parallels the emergence of
capitalism and, hence, has impregnated political thinking with analogies of
market competition. It has become so commonplace that what used to be
called ‘greed’ and regarded as a despicable vice by the ancients has become a
universally expected and even benevolent motive among the moderns – so
much so that those who still seem to be acting in the name of its antithesis,

Correspondence Address: philippe.schmitter@eui.eu

ISSN 0140-2382 Print/1743-9655 Online ª 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/01402380701834994

