Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Pahl-Wostl, C., J. Sendzimir, P. Jeffrey, J. Aerts, G. Berkamp, and K. Cross. 2007. Managing change
toward adaptive water management through social learning. Ecology and Society 12(2): 30. [online] URL:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Research, part of a Special Feature on New Methods for Adaptive Water Management
Managing Change toward Adaptive Water Management through Social
Learning

Claudia Pahl-Wostl 1, Jan Sendzimir 2, Paul Jeffrey 3, Jeroen Aerts 4, Ger Berkamp 5, and 
Katharine Cross 5

ABSTRACT. The management of water resources is currently undergoing a paradigm shift toward a more
integrated and participatory management style. This paper highlights the need to fully take into account
the complexity of the systems to be managed and to give more attention to uncertainties. Achieving this
requires adaptive management approaches that can more generally be defined as systematic strategies for
improving management policies and practices by learning from the outcomes of previous management
actions.  This  paper  describes  how  the  principles  of  adaptive  water  management  might  improve  the
conceptual and methodological base for sustainable and integrated water management in an uncertain and
complex world. Critical debate is structured around four questions: (1) What types of uncertainty need to
be taken into account in water management? (2) How does adaptive management account for uncertainty?
(3) What are the characteristics of adaptive management regimes? (4) What is the role of social learning
in managing change? Major transformation processes are needed because, in many cases, the structural
requirements, e.g., adaptive institutions and a flexible technical infrastructure, for adaptive management
are  not  available.  In  conclusion,  we  itemize  a  number  of  research  needs  and  summarize  practical
recommendations based on the current state of knowledge.

Key Words: adaptive management; integrated water resources management; social learning; adaptive
governance; change management; uncertainty

INTRODUCTION

In the past, water resources management focused
on  well-defined  problems  that  grew  increasingly
urgent during the 19th and 20th centuries as urban
populations  became  more  concentrated  and
industrial and agricultural productivity intensified.
Public  health  problems  within  cities  and  the
seemingly insatiable demand for more water drove
major  efforts 
in  urban  water  management.
Eutrophication problems in lakes and coastal seas
triggered  more  involved  research  and  legislation.
Rivers were controlled to protect cities and dryland
agriculture  from  flooding.  In  the  short  run,
technological  fixes  proved  to  be  very  efficient  in
solving  a  number  of  these  urgent  environmental
problems,  e.g.,  the  increasing  sophistication  of
wastewater  treatment  plants  addressing  problems
related  to  hygiene  and  pollution.  However,  these
problems were generally dealt with in isolation, and

potentially  undesirable  long-term  consequences
were  not  taken  into  consideration.  The  system
paradigm on which traditional water management
has been based has often been characterized as a
“command-and-control” approach. System design
was  typically  targeted  at  high  predictability  and
controllability.

For the past two decades, new and more integrated
approaches  to  water  management  have  been
developed  and  are  being  implemented  to  address
perceived  shortcomings  in  earlier  approaches.
During the last decade, the principle of integrated
water  resources  management  (IWRM)  has,  for
example,  been  used  as  a  framework  for  the
implementation  of  such  integrated  approaches  to
water management (GWP-TEC 2000). “Integrated”
clearly indicates a desire to functionally engage a
range  of  perspectives  by  formally  considering  a
wide range of potential trade-offs at different scales

1University of Osnabrueck, 2International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 3Cranfield University, 4Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 5IUCN - The World
Conservation Union

