SDI_38_1  2/16/07  12:11 PM  Page 71

Laying the Foundations of Democracy?
Reconsidering Security Sector Reform

Under UN Auspices in Kosovo 

IRENE BERNABÉU*

University of Granada, Spain

This article explores the relationship between security sector reform
(SSR) and democratic transition in post-conflict contexts, drawing on
Kosovo as a case. The study focuses in particular on the justice sector
in Kosovo, reviewing the ways in which security, the rule of law and
democracy have been intertwined. The article first outlines the context
of the international mission in Kosovo, before proceeding to consider
how  the  objectives,  needs  and  constraints  of  different  actors  have
influenced the reform of the security institutions and the democrati-
zation process. Thereafter, it discusses the concepts of SSR and demo-
cratic  transition,  briefly  reviewing  the  UN  discourse  and  record  in
SSR-related activities. Finally, it explores the interplay of these factors
in the Kosovo justice sector reform process. The main finding stem-
ming from this analysis is that not only do SSR and democratization
agendas  interfere  with  each  other,  but  measures  adopted  to  cope 
with security challenges related to the post-conflict context can also 
affect them both. Furthermore, this finding demonstrates that a well-
developed UN theoretical discourse is still not matched by the reality
of UN practices in the field.

Keywords
Nations • rule of law • Kosovo

security sector reform • democratic transition • United

OVER THE LAST TWO DECADES, United Nations peace operations

have increasingly broadened the scope of their activities to include a
strong justice, law and order component. In post-conflict situations,
where society may be highly polarized, violence rampant, and state institu-
tions near collapse, the aim of such activities is to guarantee the necessary 
stability and security so that peace and the political process are not jeopard-
ized. Accordingly, UN missions have become involved in the reform of secu-
rity institutions, alongside a variety of activities aimed at democratization.

© 2007 PRIO, www.prio.no

SAGE Publications, http://sdi.sagepub.com

Vol. 38(1): 71–92, DOI: 10.1177/0967010607075973

Downloaded from 

sdi.sagepub.com

 at UNIVERSITAET OSNABRUECK on April 18, 2016

