Psychopharmacology (2009) 206:515–530
DOI 10.1007/s00213-009-1561-0

REVIEW

From drugs to deprivation: a Bayesian framework
for understanding models of psychosis

P. R. Corlett & C. D. Frith & P. C. Fletcher

Received: 10 February 2009 / Accepted: 29 April 2009 / Published online: 28 May 2009
# The Author(s) 2009. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract
Introduction Various experimental manipulations, usually
involving drug administration, have been used to produce
symptoms of psychosis in healthy volunteers. Different
drugs produce both common and distinct symptoms. A
challenge is to understand how apparently different manip-
ulations can produce overlapping symptoms. We suggest
that current Bayesian formulations of information process-
ing in the brain provide a framework that maps onto neural
circuitry and gives us a context within which we can relate
the symptoms of psychosis to their underlying causes. This
helps us to understand the similarities and differences
across the common models of psychosis.
Materials and methods The Bayesian approach emphasises
processing of information in terms of both prior expectan-

P. R. Corlett : P. C. Fletcher
Department of Psychiatry, Brain Mapping Unit,
University of Cambridge,
Downing Site,
Cambridge CB2 3EB, UK

C. D. Frith
Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging,
12 Queen Square,
London WC1N 3BG, UK

P. R. Corlett
Abraham Ribicoff Research Facility, Connecticut Mental
Health Centre, Yale University Medical School,
New Haven, CT, USA

P. C. Fletcher (*)
Department of Psychiatry, Addenbrooke’s Hospital,
University of Cambridge,
P.O. Box 255, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK
e-mail: pcf22@cam.ac.uk

cies and current inputs. A mismatch between these leads us
to update inferences about the world and to generate new
predictions for the future. According to this model, what we
experience shapes what we learn, and what we learn
modifies how we experience things.
Discussion This simple idea gives us a powerful and
flexible way of understanding the symptoms of psychosis
where perception, learning and inference are deranged. We
examine the predictions of the cognitive model in light of
what we understand about
the neuropharmacology of
psychotomimetic drugs and thereby attempt to account for
the common and the distinctive effects of NMDA receptor
antagonists, serotonergic hallucinogens, cannabinoids and
dopamine agonists.
Conclusion By acknowledging the importance of percep-
tion and perceptual aberration in mediating the positive
symptoms of psychosis, the model also provides a useful
setting in which to consider an under-researched model of
psychosis—sensory deprivation.

Keywords Bayesian learning . Prediction error . Perception .
Belief . Psychotomimetic drugs

Introduction

[The] world is …what we make of it. Once our mould
for world making is formed it most strongly resists
change. The psychodelics (sic) allow us, for a little
while, to divest ourselves of these acquired assump-
tions and to see the universe again with an innocent
eye (Osmond 1957).

