 

Explanation in Cognitive Science 

Researcher Interview #4: Prof. Gordon Pipa (IKW) 

18.12.2014 

 

1.  Introduction. Current research (goals and scientific problems the group works on) 

 
1.1. Which cognitive phenomena have you been most interested in over the course of your 

career (i.e., visual perception, edge detection)? Which particular aspects of these 
phenomena? 

 

1.2. Could you give some concrete examples of current research projects?  

 

1.3. Do you aim to do fundamental research, or do you try to develop practical applications? 

Or perhaps both? 

 

1.4. Did you find something surprising to you or something unexpected during these projects? 

Did that change your understanding of right theoretical, methodological approach, 
explanation in general? 

 

2.  Methodological position and methods used for current research.  

 
2.1. From which educational or research background did you come to cognitive science? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2. How does your background influence the research topics you investigate, and the 

methods you use? 

2.3. You are currently leading the Neuroinformatics Research Group. Could you explain us, 

what does the term „Neuroinformatics“ mean?  

 

2.4. What is specific about Neuroinformatics approach? How does this approach compare to 

more traditional cognitive neuroscience? 

 

2.5. Do you also perform experiments/measurements in your projects or use any raw data? If 
so, which parameters of a living organism do you measure? E.g. electrical activity? BOLD 
responses? Behavioral measures? What kind of experiments do you conduct to measure 
these parameters? 

2.6. [Why are those parameters particularly important or revealing?]  

2.7. Do you use mathematical models to represent and analyze your results? What kind of 

models and which mathematical frameworks do you rely on? Could you name some 
theories/give some examples? Why those frameworks? 

 

2.8. How does the modeling and experimenting interact? Is there a specific organization of 
work (that is, are experiments performed first, or the models created)? When do you 
decide, that the model works? 

1 

