Industrial Health 2004, 42, 196–206

Original Article

Participatory Approaches to Improving Safety and
Health under Trade Union Initiative
—Experiences of POSITIVE Training Program in Asia—

Tsuyoshi KAWAKAMI1*, Kazutaka KOGI1, Naoki TOYAMA2 and Toru YOSHIKAWA1

1 Institute for Science of Labour, Japan, 2-8-14, Sugao, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, 216-8501 Kanagawa, Japan
2 Tokyo Occupational Safety and Health Center, Z-Building, 7-10-1, Kameido, Koutou-ku, 136-0071 Tokyo, Japan

Received February 19, 2004 and accepted March 1, 2004

Abstract:  The participatory, action-oriented training program in occupational safety and health
named POSITIVE (Participation-Oriented Safety Improvements by Trade Union InitiatiVE) was
established in Pakistan and extended to other countries in Asia.  The steps taken in the development
of the POSITIVE program included collecting local good examples in safety and health, developing
an action-checklist, testing a participatory training program, and conducting follow-up activities to
examine local achievements.  Training manuals were compiled to provide workers with the practical,
easy-to-understand information on safety and health improvements and on the positive roles of
trade unions.  Trade union trainers trained in the methodology conducted serial POSITIVE training
workshops in Pakistan and then in Bangladesh, Mongolia, Nepal, the Philippines and Thailand and
recently in China.  These workshops resulted in many low-cost improvements at the workplace
level.  These improvements were carried out in the technical areas of materials handling, workstations,
machine safety, physical environment, and welfare facilities.  The trade union networks have been
vital in reaching an increasing number of grass-root workplaces and in expanding the program to
other countries.  This included the visits to Mongolia and Thailand of Pakistani trade union trainers
to demonstrate the POSITIVE training.  The participatory training tools used in the POSITIVE
program such as the action checklist and group discussion methods were commonly applied in
different local situations.  Participatory approaches adopted in the POSITIVE program have proven
useful for providing practical problem-solving measures based on the local trade union initiative.

Key words:  Participatory training, Occupational safety and health, Action checklist, Low-cost
improvement, Trade union, Networking

Introduction

As rapid industrialization grows, securing safety and health
at work is becoming an increasingly important concern for
trade unions in Asia.  Many new production technologies
being applied have had both positive and negative effects
in terms of safety and health.  Workers are still facing
traditional and emerging work-related risks1–3).  Such risks

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.

include handling of heavy materials, transferred production
machines, work-stations not fitted to local workers, hazardous
substances banned or strictly regulated in industrially
developed countries, and poor welfare facilities at the
workplace.  Monotonous and repetitive patterns of work
seen in assembly lines need special attention in view of the
growing need for preventing musculoskeletal disorders and
psychosocial stress4).  Diversifying working time arrangements
such as shift and night work require adequate measures to
counter the adverse health and social effects5–7).  As in other

