APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, Mar. 2009, p. 1575–1580
0099-2240/09/$08.00⫹0 doi:10.1128/AEM.02509-08
Copyright © 2009, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

Vol. 75, No. 6

Rapid Oligonucleotide-Based Recombineering of the Chromosome

of Salmonella enterica䌤†

Roman G. Gerlach,‡ Daniela Ja¨ckel, Stefanie U. Ho¨lzer, and Michael Hensel*

Infektionsbiologische Abteilung, Universita¨tsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany

Received 2 November 2008/Accepted 6 January 2009

Recombinant engineering using Red recombinase-based approaches offers efﬁcient and rapid approaches to
deletion and modiﬁcation of genes. Here we describe a novel application of Red recombinant engineering that
enables direct manipulation of chromosomal loci by electroporation with short synthetic DNA molecules. We
demonstrate the use of this approach for the generation of scarless in-frame deletions in chromosomal genes
of Salmonella enterica. Furthermore, we describe rapid site-directed mutagenesis within bacterial chromosomes
without any requirement for cloning and mutating genes in vitro or for reintroducing mutant alleles into the
chromosome. This approach can be expected to facilitate mutational analysis in S. enterica and in other
bacterial species able to support Red-mediated recombination.

Functional genomics of bacteria frequently requires gene
manipulations, such as in-frame deletion, site-directed mu-
tagenesis, or insertion of foreign sequences. Various ap-
proaches are available to perform such manipulations with
cloned genes in vitro. However, the generation of strains with
mutations in chromosomal genes remains the “gold standard”
for functional analyses. Current approaches are tedious and
time-consuming since construction of mutant alleles in vitro
and replacement of wild-type alleles by mutant alleles are
required. Recent advances in molecular genetics of enterobac-
teria allow rapid and high-throughput approaches for the gen-
eration of chromosomal in-frame deletions (1). Expression of
the phage ␭ recombinase Red allows homologous recombina-
tion of short (40-nucleotide) homologous sequences into the
chromosome of Salmonella (3, 19). This has enabled rapid
gene deletions and fusions using linear DNA constructs gen-
erated by PCR (3, 6). It has also been shown that Red recom-
binase can mediate recombination of synthetic oligonucleo-
tides (4), and this approach has been utilized for recombinant
engineering of bacterial artiﬁcial chromosomes (18) or viral
genomes (14).

Allelic exchange in wild-type bacteria requires the use of
positively selectable markers. Usually, antibiotic resistance cas-
settes are used for gene disruption. However, insertion of such
cassettes is not compatible with in-frame deletions. For the
generation of scarless chromosomal mutations, two systems of
interest are (i) positive selection of tetracycline sensitivity (9)
and (ii) use of homing endonuclease digestion for positive
selection (16).

Here we report a novel approach that allows direct mutagen-

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Infektionsbiologische
Abteilung im Mikrobiologischen Institut, Universita¨tsklinikum Erlan-
gen, Wasserturmstr. 3-5, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany. Phone: 49
(0)9131 85 23640. Fax: 49 (0)9131 85 22531. E-mail: Michael.Hensel
@uk-erlangen.de.

‡ Present address: Robert Koch-Institut, Wernigerode Branch,

Burgstr. 37, D-38855 Wernigerode, Germany.

† Supplemental material for this article may be found at http://aem

.asm.org/.

䌤 Published ahead of print on 16 January 2009.

esis of chromosomal genes by electroporation with short syn-
thetic DNA fragments and Red recombinase-mediated recom-
bination.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Construction of tetAR insertions. Strains and plasmids used in this study are
listed in Table 1. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium NCTC12023 was used
as the target strain for mutagenesis. To insert a gene cassette consisting of tetA
and tetR into the target gene for mutagenesis, the tetAR fragment was ampliﬁed
from genomic DNA of a strain harboring a Tn10dTc insertion using a high-
ﬁdelity polymerase mixture (MBI Fermentas) and 60-mer oligonucleotides com-
plementary to tetAR and the target gene.

The PCR product was puriﬁed and used for electroporation of S. enterica
serovar Typhimurium harboring pKD46 that was made competent and induced
for expression of Red recombinase as described previously (6). After electropo-
ration the cell suspension was plated onto LB plates containing tetracycline (20
␮g ml⫺1) and incubated overnight at 37°C. Clones resistant to tetracycline
were selected, and proper insertion of the tetAR cassette was conﬁrmed by
colony PCR with oligonucleotides speciﬁc for tetA and the target gene for the
mutagenesis (Fig. 1 and Table 2). The resulting Tetr clones were also tested
for growth inhibition on Bochner-Maloy plates (11) for 24 h at 42°C. This
selection procedure is not as effective as conventional selection by antibiotics.
We observed different degrees of growth inhibition by tetracycline for clones
obtained using a mutagenesis approach. Clones with the highest sensitivity on
Bochner-Maloy plates were selected for further mutagenesis. The medium
composition, detailed step-by-step protocols, and notes are provided in the
supplemental material.

Generation of double-stranded DNA for electroporation. Oligonucleotides
were synthesized and puriﬁed using high-performance liquid chromatography by
Thermo Scientiﬁc (Ulm, Germany). Lyophilized oligonucleotides were resus-
pended in distilled H2O at a concentration of 500 pmol ml⫺1. A mixture (total
volume, 20 ␮l) containing equal amounts of the forward and reverse oligonu-
cleotides was prepared in a “Safelock” Eppendorf tube. The tube was incubated
in a water bath at 95°C for 15 min, and the water bath was allowed to slowly cool
to room temperature overnight. Proper annealing was veriﬁed by gel electro-
phoresis of diluted samples of the mixture on 2% agarose gels.

For electroporation, 2 to 3 ␮l of the annealed oligonucleotides or various
dilutions of the mixture were used to transform pKD46-containing Tetr target
strains to a Tets phenotype. After electroporation, various dilutions of the cell
suspension were plated onto freshly prepared Bochner-Maloy plates and incu-
bated for 24 h at 42°C. Tets clones were selected and streak puriﬁed on Bochner-
Maloy plates with incubation for 24 h at 42°C. Selection at 42°C was necessary to
obtain the strongest possible growth inhibition of Tetr clones. Puriﬁed clones
were streaked in parallel onto LB plates without an antibiotic or containing
tetracycline (20 ␮g ml⫺1). Clones were further conﬁrmed by colony PCR of the
mutated loci. A detailed step-by-step protocol and further practical notes are
provided in the supplemental material.

1575

