Leading Edge

Review

Engineering Cellular Metabolism

Jens Nielsen1,2,3,* and Jay D. Keasling2,4,5,6,7,*
1Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Kemiva¨ gen 10, SE412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
2Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kogle Alle´ , DK2970-Hørsholm, Denmark
3Science for Life Laboratory, Royal Institute of Technology, SE17121-Solna, Sweden
4Joint Bioenergy Institute, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA
5Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering & Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley,
CA 94720, USA
6Biological Systems & Engineering Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
7Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center (Synberc), Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
*Correspondence: nielsenj@chalmers.se (J.N.), keasling@berkeley.edu (J.D.K.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.02.004

Metabolic engineering is the science of rewiring the metabolism of cells to enhance production of
native metabolites or to endow cells with the ability to produce new products. The potential appli-
cations of such efforts are wide ranging, including the generation of fuels, chemicals, foods, feeds,
and pharmaceuticals. However, making cells into efﬁcient factories is challenging because cells
have evolved robust metabolic networks with hard-wired, tightly regulated lines of communication
between molecular pathways that resist efforts to divert resources. Here, we will review the current
status and challenges of metabolic engineering and will discuss how new technologies can enable
metabolic engineering to be scaled up to the industrial level, either by cutting off the lines of control
for endogenous metabolism or by inﬁltrating the system with disruptive, heterologous pathways
that overcome cellular regulation.

Introduction
For at least 8,000 years, humans have harnessed microbes to
produce fermented foods and beverages. In more recent his-
tory, microbes have been used to produce chemicals for a
wide range of applications. During World War I, Chaim Weis-
mann developed the acetone-butanol-ethanol fermentation pro-
cess, which was used for 50 years to produce acetone and is
now being revived for production of 1-butanol. In the 1920s,
fermentation of the ﬁlamentous fungus Aspergillus niger was
adapted to generate citric acid, a food and beverage ingredient.
During World War II, the same technology was used for indus-
trial scale production of penicillin, the ﬁrst pharmaceutical pro-
duced by fermentation.

The following decades witnessed a dramatic increase in the
use of microorganisms to synthesize natural products of pharma-
ceutical interest, such as antibiotics, cholesterol lowering agents,
immunosuppressants, and anti-cancer drugs. Improved perfor-
mance of classical fermentation processes for such purposes
was typically achieved through mutagenesis and screening.
For antibiotics in particular, this was an extremely efﬁcient
approach, with penicillin production using Penicillium chrysoge-
num boosted by more than 10,000-fold (Thykaer and Nielsen,
2003). Although genetic engineering made it possible to use a
more directed approach to improve metabolism, most work
focused on the development of cell factories for production of re-
combinant proteins for use as pharmaceuticals, and today, there
are more than 300 biopharmaceutical proteins and antibodies on
the market with sales exceeding $100 billion (Langer, 2012).

With the late 1980s and early 1990s came new insights into the
complex inner workings of cellular metabolism, fueled by bioin-

formatics and mathematical modeling methods that allowed
quantitative analysis. This enabled speciﬁc genetic modiﬁca-
tions altering cellular metabolism to be introduced, such that
ﬂuxes could be directed toward the product of interest. Thus,
the ﬁeld of metabolic engineering was born (Bailey, 1991; Ste-
phanopoulos and Vallino, 1991; Nielsen, 2001; Keasling, 2010).
Now, more than twenty years later, metabolic engineering has
been exploited not only to improve traditional microbial fermen-
tation processes, but also to produce chemicals that are
currently used as fuels, materials, and pharmaceutical ingredi-
ents (Table 1).

Despite the advanced systems and synthetic biology technol-
ogies now available for detailed phenotypic characterization of
cells and genome editing, developing new cell factories that
meet the economic requirements for industrial scale production
is still challenging, typically requiring 6–8 years and over $50
million. The reason for this is inherent to the cells themselves.
To ensure metabolic homeostasis even when exposed to vary-
ing environmental conditions, cells have evolved extensive
regulation and complex interactions between metabolic path-
ways. Redirecting carbon ﬂuxes toward desired metabolites
therefore requires modulating the lines of communication in
endogenous metabolic pathways or inﬁltrating the system with
disruptive signals that interfere with these regulatory mecha-
nisms. At present, our knowledge of how metabolism is regu-
lated even in simple model cells is limited. As a result, engineer-
ing a cell
factory involves several rounds of the so-called
‘‘design-build-test’’ cycle, in which a certain metabolic design
is implemented and improved through genetic engineering
and thereafter tested.

Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1185

