<circular	email,	March	14,	2016>	
	Dear	students,	
	[Apologies	for	largely	identical	messages	to	those	enrolled	in	both	my	classes.	Please	
read	carefully	nonetheless.]	
You	are	receiving	this	email	because	you	are	enrolled	in	the	seminar	class	on	
semantics	in	the	summer	term	of	2016,	which	I	will	have	the	privilege	of	teaching.	
Today,	I	want	to	briefly	introduce	myself,	but	more	importantly,	address	some	
organizational	details.	
As	for	the	former:	My	name	is	Axel	Bohmann,	and	I	am	a	doctoral	candidate	in	
English	language	and	linguistics	at	the	University	of	Texas	at	Austin.	One	of	the	
projects	I	am	involved	in	is	a	joint	research	endeavor	between	groups	from	Austin	
and	Osnabrück,	which	is	the	connection	that	brings	me	to	your	classroom	this	
coming	semester.	I	look	forward	to	meeting	you	all.	
And	now	for	the	organizational	elements:	
•  As	you	are	no	doubt	aware,	the	seminar	will	take	place	entirely	in	April,	in	
two	dense	blocks.	Thus	the	workload	will	be	heavily	front-ended.	In	other	
words:	you	will	be	very	busy	between	now	and	the	end	of	April,	but	will	have	
the	perk	of	being	a	whole	lot	less	busy	during	the	rest	of	the	semester.	This,	
however,	will	only	work	if	you	are	willing	and	able	to	crunch	down	now,	do	a	
good	deal	of	reading	ahead	of	the	semester’s	start,	and	stay	focused	
throughout	April.	If	this	will	be	a	problem,	the	present	class	may	not	be	for	
you.	Please	get	in	touch	with	me	if	you	have	any	questions	or	concerns	about	
this.	
•  To	concretize	the	above:	it	is	vital	that	you	buy	the	course	book	as	soon	as	
possible.	For	our	first	session	on	April	7,	I	expect	you	to	have	read	and	be	
able	to	discuss	chapter	1	of	Riemer’s	introduction.	Hint:	if	you	are	itching	to	
start	reading	right	now,	try	googling	“internet	archive	riemer	semantics.”	
•  Even	with	the	first	chapter	read	by	everyone,	we	will	need	to	cover	more	
ground	during	the	first	block	of	the	seminar.	I	do	not	want	to	overburden	you	
with	reading,	so	the	Saturday	(April	9)	will	be	a	highly	interactive	session	
taught	in	large	part	by	student	expert	groups.	The	details	will	follow	shortly,	
but	if	anyone	is	particularly	interested	in	one	of	the	following	chapters	in	
Riemer,	feel	free	to	let	me	know	now	already:	ch.	2	(meaning	and	definition),	
ch.	3	(external	context),	ch.	4	(interpersonal	context),	ch.	5	(analyzing	and	
distinguishing	meanings).	
•  Finally,	I	would	like	to	ask	you	to	fill	in	the	following	doodle	to	let	me	know	
whether	you	will	need	to	receive	2	LPs	or	4	LPs	for	the	class:	
http://doodle.com/poll/8yym795p89fsvems	.	FYI:	the	extra	assignment	for	
the	4	LP	people	will	be	a	final	exam	(those	concerned	about	not	being	able	to	
study	for	a	final	in	the	limited	time	frame	of	the	class:	I	am	willing	to	work	
with	you	on	alternatives;	please	get	in	touch	with	me).	

