Americas Program Report
Rio de Janeiro: Control of the Poor Seen as
Crucial for the Olympics
By Raul Zibechi | January 18, 2010

The prospect of the FIFA World Cup in 2014 followed by the Olympic Games in 2016 has reignited the
debate about public security in a country where there is an undeclared war taking place in the favelas
between the military police, paramilitary groups, and drug traffickers, but where the principal victims
are the poor.

the Brazilian military is in charge of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). There, as in
Rio, the military police have to use diggers to first clear
the streets, a form of “combat engineering” to overcome
a logistical problem pioneered in Brazil.

In comparing what happens in the favelas of Rio with the
reality of Kabul and Port-au-Prince, the conservative right
wing is deliberately attempting to criminalize the poverty
concentrated in Rio’s 750 favelas inhabited by 1.5 mil-
lion people. The feeling of an escalation in the war was
reinforced when, on Oct 17, two weeks after Rio was
awarded the Olympic Games, a police helicopter was
shot down over the favela known as Morro dos Macacos (
the Hill of Monkeys).

The mountain sides around Rio have been home to poor
migrant workers for over 50 years. They live in precari-
ous conditions without water, electricity, sanitation,
healthcare, or education. Statistics show that 20 people
per day are assassinated in Rio, turning the city into
what the sociologist Vera Malaguti terms “a laboratory of
genocidal techniques.”2 The police in Rio have the dubi-
ous reputation of being the police force with the highest
kill rate in the world. This is not to say that they are out
of control and kill on a whim. Brazil is a paradise of wild
capitalism, with the largest gap of economic inequality in
the world. Rio is its star, with frantic real estate specula-
tion intensifying as the big events approach.

Feared BOPE

Violence in Brazil is not only very high but also continues
to grow alarmingly. In 2006 there were almost 50,000
homicides (49,145 to be exact, or 26.3 per 100,000
inhabitants). In the state of Rio de Janeiro 2008 statistics

Americas Policy Program

w w w. a m e r i c a s p o l i c y. o r g
A New World of Citizen Action, Analysis, and Policy Options

A favela in Rio de Janeiro.

“The day to day reality that Rio police confront in the
favelas is very similar to that which NATO troops face in
Afghanistan,” says Kaiser Konrad, director of Defesanet, a
magazine specializing in military issues.1 He goes on to
say that Rio is one of the most complex theaters of war
in the world, in part due to its diverse geographical ter-
rains such as jungle and mountain ranges. “The danger
encountered by a Western soldier patrolling certain parts
of Kabul is the same as that encountered by a soldier or
policeman called into one of Rio’s hot spots,” he con-
cludes.

In the favelas, the drug traffickers have dug out ditches
and built barricades with large cement blocks or boulders
in order to prevent the progress of the “caveirao,” an
armored vehicle the size of a bus which is used by the
military police when they enter the favelas. The same
tactics are reproduced in the poor areas in Haiti, where

