	  

1	  

Study Skills 
 
Terry Eagleton, Literary Theory: An Introduction, Minneapolis: U of MN P, 2008. 

"Introduction: What is Literature?" (Excerpts) 

Group 1 

[…]  There  have  been  various  attempts  to  define  literature.  You  can  define  it,  for  example,  as 
'imaginative'  writing  in  the  sense  of  fiction  -  writing  which  is  not  literally  true.  But  even  the 
briefest reflection on what people commonly include under the heading of literature suggests that 
this will not do. Seventeenth- century English literature includes Shakespeare, Webster , Marvell 
and  Milton;  but  it  also  stretches  to  the  essays  of  Francis  Bacon,  the  sermons  of  John  Donne, 
Bunyan's  spiritual  autobiography  and  whatever  it  was  that  Sir  Thomas  Browne  wrote.  […]  A 
distinction between 'fact' and 'fiction'; then, seems unlikely to get us very far, not least because 
the distinction itself is often a questionable one. […] 

Perhaps  one  needs  a  different  kind  of  approach  altogether.  Perhaps  literature  is  definable  not 
according to whether it is fictional or 'imaginative', but because it uses language in peculiar ways. 
On this theory, literature is a kind of writing which, in the words of the Russian critic Roman 
Jacobson,  represents   an  'organized  violence  committed  on  ordinary  speech'.   Literature 
transforms  and  intensifies  ordinary  language,  deviates  systematically  from  everyday  speech.  If 
you  approach  me  at  bus  stop  and  murmur  'Thou  still  unravished  bride  of  quietness'  then  I  am 
instantly aware that I am in the presence of the literary. I know this because the texture, rhythm 
and  resonance  of  your  words  are  in  excess  of  their  abstract  able  meaning  -or  as  the  linguists 
might more technically put it, there is disproportion between the signifiers and the signified. Your 
language draws attention to itself, flaunts its material being, as statements like 'Don't you know 
the drivers are on strike?' do not.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

