R E V I E W S

MAKING SENSE OF IT ALL:
BACTERIAL CHEMOTAXIS

George H. Wadhams and Judith P. Armitage

Abstract | Bacteria must be able to respond to a changing environment, and one way to respond
is to move. The transduction of sensory signals alters the concentration of small phosphorylated
response regulators that bind to the rotary flagellar motor and cause switching. This simple
pathway has provided a paradigm for sensory systems in general. However, the increasing
number of sequenced bacterial genomes shows that although the central sensory mechanism
seems to be common to all bacteria, there is added complexity in a wide range of species.

In an ever-changing environment, it is essential that
organisms  are  able  to  sense  these  changes  and  to
respond appropriately. Possible responses include alter-
ations in gene expression and/or active movement
towards or away from an environment. Most sensory
pathways in eukaryotic organisms rely on serine, threo-
nine or tyrosine protein kinases, whereas the most com-
mon  sensory  pathways 
in  prokaryotes  use  a
histidine–aspartate phosphorelay (HAP) system. HAP
systems have at least two components — a dimeric
histidine protein kinase (HPK) and a response regula-
tor (RR)1. HAP systems are also found in many lower
eukaryotes, in which they control processes such as
osmoregulation in, for example, Saccharomyces cere-
visiae 2, Candida  albicans3
and  Dictyostelium
discoideum4. They are also found in plants, in which
they control, for example, ethylene-mediated fruit
ripening5 and blue-light responses. The Arabidopsis
thaliana genome has genes for 16 HPK and 24 RR
homologues.

Bacteria can sense a vast range of environmental
signals, from the concentrations of nutrients and toxins
to oxygen levels, pH, osmolarity and the intensity and
wavelength of light. Genome sequencing has identified
over 600 HAP systems and some individual bacterial
species contain more than 130 (REF. 6) — for example,
Myxococcus xanthus has about 140 HAP systems (J. R.
Kirby, personal communication). Despite the extremely
high homology between the components of HAP sys-
tems, numerous pathways operate in individual bacteria

without significant crosstalk. Although most of these
HAP systems are involved in the regulation of gene
expression, one of the most well-understood pathways
regulates motile behaviour. Chemotaxis operates as part
of a complex network of signals that balance to produce
a physiological response that is suited to a specific envi-
ronment (BOX 1). Here, we describe the basic bacterial
chemosensory pathway, as well as some of the varia-
tions of this system. However, first we provide a general
overview of HAP systems.

Histidine–aspartate-phosphorelay systems
HAP systems rely on the trans-autophosphorylation of a
His residue that resides in one monomer of the HPK
dimer by the γ-phosphoryl group of an ATP molecule
that  is  bound  to  the  kinase  domain  of the  other
monomer. This phosphoryl group is then transferred to
an Asp residue on a separate RR protein to alter its activ-
ity and generate a response. Some systems incorporate
several His–Asp phosphorylation steps, which possibly
allows  for  complex  regulatory  control  as  discussed
below7,8.

Numerous HAP systems have been identified in
different bacteria (FIG. 1). Most of the HPKs involved
(for example, EnvZ; FIG. 1a) have an N-terminal region
that spans the membrane twice, which results in an
intervening periplasmic domain that can sense an
extracellular  signal. The  C-terminal  cytoplasmic
region comprises a linker or HAMP DOMAIN (‘histidine
kinases, adenylyl cyclases, methyl-binding proteins

HAMP DOMAIN
(‘Histidine kinases, adenylyl
cyclases, methyl-binding
proteins and phosphatases’
domain). A domain that is
broadly conserved in histidine
protein kinases, chemoreceptors
and phosphatases. It contains
two amphipathic helices, and is
presumed to have a role in signal
transduction.

Department of
Biochemistry,
University of Oxford,
Oxford OX1 3QU, UK.
Correspondence to J.P.A.
e-mail: judith.armitage@
bioch.ox.ac.uk
doi:10.1038/nrm1524

1024 | DECEMBER 2004 | VOLUME 5

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

©  2004 Nature  Publishing Group

