Original Article |

doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2010.02281.x

Physical activity and risk of cognitive decline: a meta-analysis
of prospective studies

F. Soﬁ1,2,3, D. Valecchi1, D. Bacci1, R. Abbate2, G. F. Gensini1, A. Casini3 & C. Macchi1

From the 1Don Carlo Gnocchi Foundation, Centro S. Maria agli Ulivi, Onlus IRCCS; 2Department of Medical and Surgical Critical Care, Thrombosis
Centre, University of Florence; and 3Regional Agency of Nutrition, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi, Florence, Italy

Abstract. Soﬁ F, Valecchi D, Bacci D, Abbate R, Gensini
GF, Casini A, Macchi C (Centro S. Maria agli Ulivi, On-
lus IRCCS; Thrombosis Centre, University of Flor-
ence; Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi,
Florence, Italy). Physical activity and risk of cognitive
decline: a meta-analysis of prospective studies.
J Intern Med 2011; 269: 107–117.

Objective. The relationship between physical activity
and cognitive function is intriguing but controversial.
We performed a systematic meta-analysis of all the
available prospective studies that investigated the
association between physical activity and risk of cog-
nitive decline in nondemented subjects.

Methods. We conducted an electronic literature search
through MedLine, Embase, Google Scholar, Web of
Science, The Cochrane Library and bibliographies of
retrieved articles up to January 2010. Studies were
included if they analysed prospectively the associa-
tion between physical activity and cognitive decline in
nondemented subjects.

Results. After the review process, 15 prospective stud-
ies (12 cohorts) were included in the ﬁnal analysis.

These studies included 33 816 nondemented sub-
jects followed for 1–12 years. A total of 3210 patients
showed cognitive decline during the follow-up. The
cumulative analysis for all the studies under a ran-
dom-effects model showed that subjects who per-
formed a high level of physical activity were signiﬁ-
cantly protected ()38%) against cognitive decline
during the follow-up (hazard ratio (HR) 0.62, 95%
conﬁdence interval
(CI) 0.54–0.70; P < 0.00001).
Furthermore, even analysis of low-to-moderate level
exercise also showed a signiﬁcant protection ()35%)
against cognitive impairment (HR 0.65, 95% CI 0.57–
0.75; P < 0.00001).

Conclusion. This is the ﬁrst meta-analysis to evaluate
the role of physical activity on cognitive decline
amongst nondemented subjects. The present results
suggest a signiﬁcant and consistent protection for all
levels of physical activity against the occurrence of
cognitive decline.

Keywords: cognitive decline, dementia, exercise, physi-
cal activity.

Introduction

It is unquestionable that physical activity has positive
effects on health; indeed, over the last few decades, a
large body of evidence has shown that physical activ-
ity helps to reduce the risk of cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular diseases, diabetes, obesity, hyper-
tension and some cancers [1]. Moreover, it has been
demonstrated that an active lifestyle impacts on all
causes of mortality. With ageing, some cognitive
functions such as attention, memory and concentra-
tion decline, becoming slower and inefﬁcient, as for
some physical functions such as walking and bal-
ance. These manifestations are the result of neural

cell loss in the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes [2]
and strongly depend on an ipofunction of the mono-
aminergic and cholinergic pathways [3]. Many of
these cognitive changes are evident and can cause
mild disability, even if a state of dementia is not
reached.

Cognitve decline is heterogeneous, depending on var-
ious factors. Many studies have shown an inverse
relation between physical activity and the risk of
developing cognitive decline [4, 5], but the cause of
the association has not been clearly established. Indi-
viduals who remain active throughout life, especially
during middle age, generally have better cognitive

ª 2010 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine

107

