Psychon Bull Rev (2012) 19:647–653
DOI 10.3758/s13423-012-0245-7

BRIEF REPORT

Does media multitasking always hurt? A positive correlation
between multitasking and multisensory integration

Kelvin F. H. Lui & Alan C.-N. Wong

Published online: 12 April 2012
# Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2012

Abstract Heavy media multitaskers have been found to per-
form poorly in certain cognitive tasks involving task switch-
ing, selective attention, and working memory. An account for
this is that with a breadth-biased style of cognitive control,
multitaskers tend to pay attention to various information
available in the environment, without sufficient focus on the
information most relevant to the task at hand. This cognitive
style, however, may not cause a general deficit in all kinds of
tasks. We tested the hypothesis that heavy media multitaskers
would perform better in a multisensory integration task than
would others, due to their extensive experience in integrating
information from different modalities. Sixty-three participants
filled out a questionnaire about their media usage and com-
pleted a visual search task with and without synchronous
tones (pip-and-pop paradigm). It was found that a higher
degree of media multitasking was correlated with better mul-
tisensory integration. The fact that heavy media multitaskers
are not deficient in all kinds of cognitive tasks suggests that
media multitasking does not always hurt.

Keywords Attention . Media multitasking

Introduction

Humans often engage in multitasking—that is, performing
more than one task simultaneously or in rapid alternation.
We can effortlessly talk to each other while walking and watch
television while eating. Certain multitasking situations are
K. F. H. Lui (*) : A. C.-N. Wong
Department of Psychology,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
362A Sino Building,
Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
e-mail: f2a8kelvin@yahoo.com.hk

more challenging because the tasks involved are more difficult
or they concurrently engage overlapping processes and, thus,
interfere with each other more. Talking on cell phones while
driving is a good example (e.g., Nunes & Recarte, 2002;
Strayer & Johnston, 2001). Sometimes, such difficulties can
have serious consequences.

One way that modern technology has transformed human
living styles is through the invention and popularization of
various media of communication and interaction, including
radio, television, telephone and text messaging, video games,
computers, and the Internet. Media multitasking has thus
grown into a popular phenomenon and even a way of life,
especially among young people (Roberts, Foehr, & Rideout,
2005). The high accessibility of computers, in particular, has
cultivated obsessive multitasking, due to the ease of switching
between instant messaging, music, Web surfing, e-mail,
online videos, computer-based games, computer-based appli-
cations, and so forth (Foehr, 2006).

The immediate effects of media multitasking on one’s
memory, learning, and other cognitive functions have been a
focus of recent research. It was found that watching TV while
doing homework decreased participants’ performance on the
recognition of TV content (Zhang, Jeong, & Fishbein,
2010). Besides, Furnham and Bradley (1997) found detrimen-
tal effects of background music on participants’ performance in
various cognitive tasks. Armstrong and Chung (2000) showed
a negative effect of background television during science article
reading on subsequent recall and recognition. Similarly, reading
and watching video simultaneously impaired participants’ per-
formance on the reading task (Lin, Robertson, & Lee, 2009).
Moreover, Hembrooke and Gay (2003) found that opening
laptops and engaging in media multitasking behaviors during
a lecture impaired students’ memory for lecture contents.

Research also has examined the chronic effects of media
multitasking. Kirschner and Karpinski (2010) found that heavy

