The Interaction of the Bilingual’s Two Phonetic 
Systems: Differences in Early and Late Korean-

English Bilinguals 

 

Wendy Baker 

Brigham Young University 

 
 
1. Introduction 
 

One  of  the  basic  questions  of  bilingual  research  is  to  what  extent  the  bilingual’s  two  phonetic 
systems  influence  each  other,  a  question  that  has  occupied  a  prominent  place  in  bilingual  research 
almost from the outset of the field (see, for example, Weinreich, 1953).  Recent studies in bilingual 
first  language  acquisition  (BFLA)  demonstrate  that,  at  least  in  simultaneous  bilingual  acquisition, 
infants exposed to two languages are developing what appear to be two phonetic/phonological systems 
from  the  beginning  (Johnson  and  Wilson,  2002;  Kehoe,  2002;  Bosch  and  Sebastian-Galles,  2001, 
Vihman, 2002), although their two systems may differ from monolinguals of either language (Mack, 
1989; Bosch, Costa, & Sebastian-Galles, 2000).   

In late bilingualism (i.e., when a second language is learned in adulthood), where one language 
system is already established when a second is learned, most likely a separate system for the second 
language  does not develop in the beginning.  In fact, most researchers agree, at least as initial stages of 
L2  learning,  adults  perceive  and  produce  both  native  (L1)  and  second  language  (L2)  vowels  and 
consonants (“sounds” for short) as instances of  similar L1 sounds.  In fact, it is only after extensive 
exposure to the second language that separate long-term memory representations (categories) for L2 
sounds are formed, if at all (Flege, Meador, & MacKay, 1999).   

The differences between these two types of bilingualism indicate that several factors most likely 
influence  both  the  extent  the  two  languages  influence  each  other  and  the  direction  of  the  influence 
(Flege, 1995; Piske, Flege, McKay, & Meador, 2002; Khattab, 2002).  The purpose of this study is to 
examine  how  two  factors,  the  amount  of  similarity  between  native  (L1)  and  second-language  (L2) 
sounds,  and  age  at  the  time  of  second  language  learning,  determine  how  the  L1  and  L2  phonetic 
systems interact both at initial and more advanced stages of L2 learning. 

The first factor, the amount of similarity between L1 and L2 sounds (or cross-language similarity),  
at least in late L2 learning, heavily determines how much the L1 influences the L2 (Flege, MacKay, 
and Munro, 1999; Best, 1995; Flege, 1995).  In particular, the more similar L2 sounds are to L1 sounds, 
the more likely the L1 will influence how L2 sounds are perceived and produced.  For example, Flege, 
Bohn,  &  Jang  (1997)  showed  that  learners  of  English  perceived  and  produced  English  vowels 
differently  depending  on  their  native  language.    In  addition,  Aoyama,  Flege,  Guion,  Yamada,  & 
Akhane-Yamada  (2003)  have  determined  that  Japanese  learners  of  English  identify  English  /r/  as 
being  more  similar  to  Japanese  //  than  this  Japanese  consonant  is  to  English  /l/.    These  same 
Japanese learners are more likely to produce English /r/ more accurately than English /l/.  These and 
many other studies indicate that cross-language similarity is an important factor in how much the L1 
and L2 interact in bilinguals (Best, 1995; Guion, Flege, Akhane-Yamada, & Pruitt, 2000). 

The second factor that may influence the organization of a bilinguals’ L1 and L2 phonetic systems 
is the learner’s age at the time of learning a second language.  In particular, in early bilinguals (i.e., 
those  that  learn  a  second  langauge  in  childhood),  the  native  language  seems  to  exert  less  of  an 
influence on the perception and production of the L2, suggesting that cross-language similarity  may 
play less of a role in early than in late bilinguals (Baker, Trofimovich, Mack, and Flege, 2001).  .  For 
example,  Flege,  MacKay  and  Meador  (1999)  found  that  early  Italian-English  bilinguals  were  more 
accurate in their perception and production of English vowels than were late Italian-English bilinguals, 

(cid:13)© 2005 Wendy Baker. ISB4: Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Bilingualism, ed. James(cid:10)Cohen, Kara T. McAlister, Kellie Rolstad, and Jeff MacSwan, 163-174. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.