I J o

D

R

The future of lucid dreaming treatment
Commentary on “The neurobiology of consciousness:  
Lucid dreaming wakes up” by J. Allan Hobson
Josefin Gavie1 & Antti Revonsuo1, 2
1School of Humanities and Informatics, University of Skövde, Sweden 
2Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Turku, Finland

Introduction

1. 
Hobson (2009) provides us with a timely and useful review 
of the history and the latest developments in lucid dreaming 
research.  It  seems  that  lucid  dreaming  is,  although  meth-
odologically a challenging phenomenon to study, neverthe-
less  becoming  a  part  of  the  mainstream  cognitive  neuro-
sciences. As Hobson’s review shows, our understanding of 
what kinds of states of consciousness and brain areas are 
involved  in  the  production  of  lucid  dreams  has  improved 
considerably. 

Hobson  (2009)  does  not  discuss  the  potential  practical 
applications  of  lucid  dreaming.  In  particular,  it  has  been 
argued that lucid dreaming may have potential as a thera-
peutic tool against recurrent nightmares (Green & McCreery, 
1994; Halliday, 1988; LaBerge, 1985; LaBerge & Rheingold, 
1990; Tholey, 1988). Therefore, the aim of the present com-
mentary is to draw attention to the potentially important ap-
plication that connects lucid dreams with nightmares: Lucid 
Dreaming Treatment (LDT). 

Nightmares  and  lucidity  are  closely  related  phenomena 
also because, in some dreamers, highly unpleasant dreams 
may  evoke  unprompted  lucidity.  For  people  who  suffer 
from recurrent nightmares that lead to sleep problems and 
increased  anxiety,  lucidity  might  prove  to  be  a  potentially 
useful  tool  that  offers  a  way  to  control  the  content  of  the 
dream and thereby master the threatening situation within 
the dream. This could lead to a reduced frequency of night-
mares,  to  less  frightening  nightmares,  and  thus  alleviate 
some of the suffering related to recurrent nightmares.

Lucid Dreaming Treatment

2. 
A nightmare is defined by DSM–IV as an extremely fright-
ening dream resulting in direct awakening and as having a 
negative impact on different aspects of waking life (Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association, 2000). Research studies have 
investigated  the  effects  of  LDT  to  reduce  nightmare  fre-
quency. The two key components of the treatment are, first, 
learning to use cues that help the dreamer to become lucid 
during nightmares and, second, learning what one can do 

Corresponding address: 
Josefin Gavie, School of Humanities and Informatics, Univer-
sity of Skövde, Sweden. 
Email: j_gavie@hotmail.com

there after lucidity is reached. The participants in LDT are 
taught different lucid dreaming induction techniques, such 
as questioning the nature of the environment ‘Is this real or 
am  I  dreaming?’  and  to  intentionally  recognize  the  fright-
ening  scenery  of  their  nightmare  to  be  a  dream.  The  par-
ticipants then choose some feature or content of the dream 
that they will attempt to change when lucid, so that the dis-
tressing nightmare will be redirected to a different track with 
an alternative (and less fearsome) ending. 

Converging  results  from  LDT  studies  suggest  that  lucid 
dreaming  treatment  is  in  fact  effective  for  reducing  night-
mares.  Several  of  the  participants  in  such  studies  have 
shown a decreased frequency of nightmares (Spoormaker 
& van den Bout, 2006; Spoormaker, van den Bout & Meijer, 
2003; Zadra & Pihl, 1997) and for some the treatment also 
contributed to a slightly improved subjective sleep quality 
(Spoormaker et al., 2003). However, some participants did 
experience  fewer  nightmares  after  engaging  in  LDT  even 
though they had not become lucid at all and consequently 
could not have lucidly altered the content of their dreams. 
This  suggests  that  the  mere  idea  or  feeling,  necessarily 
included  in  LDT,  of  being  potentially  able  to  control  and 
master one’s nightmares might play an equally vital role for 
reducing  nightmares  (Spoormaker  &  van  den  Bout,  2006; 
Spoormaker et al., 2003; Zadra & Pihl, 1997). Perhaps the 
feeling of potential control reduces anxiety as such, and the 
reduced levels of anxiety lead to a lesser frequency of night-
mares.

Nightmares in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

3. 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is an anxiety disorder 
which  may  develop  from  exposure  to  a  life-threatening  or 
otherwise traumatizing event. The symptoms of PTSD are 
collected under three clusters, where one cluster consists of 
intrusion and persistent recollection of the traumatic event, 
including  nightmares.  Posttraumatic  nightmares  are  de-
fined by the cluster of symptoms related to the traumatizing 
event and are thus defined as recurring nightmares of the 
event  (American  Psychiatric  Association,  2000).  Research 
has  shown  that  posttraumatic  nightmares  are  among  the 
most common symptoms in PTSD patients: up to 60-80% 
of PTSD patients suffer from them.

Treating PTSD as such does not necessarily reduce the 
frequency  of  nightmares  (Spoormaker,  2008).  PTSD  and 
nightmares may in fact become intertwined in such a man-
ner that nightmares strengthen PTSD symptoms and PTSD 
in turn causes nightmares. Disturbed sleep and nightmares 

International Journal of Dream Research   Volume 3, No. 1 (2010)

13

