J Autism Dev Disord
DOI 10.1007/s10803-014-2097-7

O R I G I N A L P A P E R

Impact of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy on Observed Autism
Symptom Severity During School Recess: A Preliminary
Randomized, Controlled Trial

Jeffrey J. Wood • Cori Fujii • Patricia Renno •
Marilyn Van Dyke

Ó Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract This
study compared cognitive behavioral
therapy (CBT) and treatment-as-usual (TAU) in terms of
effects on observed social communication-related autism
symptom severity during unstructured play time at school
for children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Thir-
teen children with ASD (7–11 years old) were randomly
assigned to 32 sessions of CBT or community-based psy-
chosocial treatment (TAU) for 16 weeks. The CBT pro-
gram is based on the memory retrieval competition model
and emphasizes the development of perspective-taking
through guided behavioral experimentation supplemented
with reﬂective Socratic discussion and supported by parent
training and school consultation to promote generalization
of social communication and emotion regulation skills.
Trained observers blind to treatment condition observed
each child during recess on two separate days at baseline
and again at posttreatment, using a structured behavioral
observation system that generates frequency scores for
observed social communication-related autism symptoms.
CBT outperformed TAU at posttreatment on the frequency
of self-isolation, the proportion of time spent with peers,
the frequency of positive or appropriate interaction with
peers, and the frequency of positive or appropriate peer
responses to the target child (d effect size range 1.34–1.62).
On average, children in CBT were engaged in positive or
appropriate social
interaction with peers in 68.6 % of
observed intervals at posttreatment, compared to 25 % of

J. J. Wood (&)  C. Fujii  P. Renno  M. Van Dyke
Department of Education, University of California, Los Angeles,
Moore Hall, Box 951521, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
e-mail: jwood@gseis.ucla.edu

J. J. Wood
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA

intervals for children in TAU. Further investigation of this
intervention modality with larger samples and follow-up
assessments is warranted.
Keywords Cognitive behavioral therapy  Autism
spectrum disorders  School-aged children  School
observations

Introduction

Affecting core autism symptoms through psychosocial
treatment has been an elusive goal in the autism literature,
particularly for school-age children. Most psychosocial
interventions that have been tested in randomized, con-
trolled trials have failed to yield measureable improvement
in core autism symptoms among school-aged children (Rao
et al. 2008), although recent interventions are beginning to
show more promise (e.g., Kasari et al. 2012). The severity
of autism spectrum symptoms exhibited during childhood
predicts the level of adaptive functioning in later years
(e.g., Szatmari et al. 2009), and therefore has important
prognostic and treatment implications. Developing treat-
ments that can signiﬁcantly reduce core autism symptom
severity in children is thus a high priority (Spence and
Thurm 2010).

Core autism symptoms are wide-ranging and multifac-
eted, spanning from impaired reciprocal communication
and pragmatic language deﬁcits, to limited friendships, to
repetitive behaviors such as insistence on nonfunctional
routines. The core symptoms tend to be stable over time
(Matson and Horovitz 2010; Matson et al. 2010) and
resistant even to some intensive interventions (e.g., Daw-
son et al. 2010). The majority of individuals diagnosed
with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) in childhood, even

123

