Neural substrates of cognitive capacity limitations

Timothy J. Buschmana,1, Markus Siegela,b, Jefferson E. Roya, and Earl K. Millera

aThe Picower Institute for Learning and Memory and Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA 02139; and bCentre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

Edited by Robert Desimone, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, and approved May 23, 2011 (received for review March 23, 2011)

Cognition has a severely limited capacity: Adult humans can retain
only about four items “in mind”. This limitation is fundamental to
human brain function: Individual capacity is highly correlated with
intelligence measures and capacity is reduced in neuropsychiatric
diseases. Although human capacity limitations are well studied,
their mechanisms have not been investigated at the single-neuron
level. Simultaneous recordings from monkey parietal and frontal
cortex revealed that visual capacity limitations occurred immedi-
ately upon stimulus encoding and in a bottom-up manner. Capacity
limitations were found to reﬂect a dual model of working memory.
The left and right halves of visual space had independent capacities
and thus are discrete resources. However, within each hemiﬁeld,
neural information about successfully remembered objects was re-
duced by adding further objects, indicating that resources are shared.
Together, these results suggest visual capacity limitation is due to
discrete, slot-like, resources, each containing limited pools of neural
information that can be divided among objects.
slot model | interference model | attention | hemisphere
Despite the remarkable power and ﬂexibility of human cog-

nition, our working memory—the “online” workspace that
most cognitive mechanisms depend upon—is surprisingly lim-
ited. An average adult human has a capacity to retain only four
items at a given time (1–3). This capacity is fundamental to
cognition: Individual variability in capacity is highly correlated
with ﬂuid intelligence (4–6) and patients with neuropsychiatric
disorders often have a reduced capacity (7, 8). Because it is so
basic to cognition, capacity limitation has been well studied in
humans (9), particularly the capacity limitation of visual short-
term working memory (for reviews see refs. 1 and 4). This work
has led to several competing theories about the neural basis of
capacity limitations. “Discrete” models suggest that capacity limi-
tations reﬂect a limit in the number of objects that can be simul-
taneously represented (3, 10, 11). “Flexible resource” models
predict that only the total amount of information available is
limited, with information divided among all represented objects
(12–14). It is also not clear whether the limitation is in stimulus
encoding or in maintenance (15).

To better understand the neural basis of capacity limitations
we simultaneously recorded from single neurons in the pre-
frontal and parietal cortex of two monkeys trained to perform
a typical human test of cognitive capacity: change localization
(Fig. 1A). Two arrays of objects (colored squares) were sepa-
rated by a short memory delay. In the second array, the color of
a randomly chosen object (the target) was changed. Monkeys
were trained to detect this change and make a saccade to it.
Cognitive load was increased by varying the number of objects in
the arrays from two to ﬁve. We recorded simultaneously from
multiple electrodes in the frontal cortex [lateral prefrontal cortex
(LPFC) and frontal eye ﬁelds (FEF)] and the parietal cortex
[lateral intraparietal area (LIP)]. These areas were chosen as
they are critical for short-term memory (16–19) and human
studies implicate them in capacity limitations (20–22).

Results
Like in humans, increasing the number of objects decreased per-
formance (84.8% correct with 2 objects to 66.5% with 5 objects,
Fig. 1B). The amount of information the monkeys had about

the objects in the array, calculated from their behavior (SI Mate-
rials and Methods), increased from 2 to 4 objects, but then satu-
rated, reﬂecting a limited capacity (Fig. 1C; 2 < 3, P < 10−15; 3 < 4,
P < 10−15; 4 < 5, P = 0.12, two-tailed permutation test). A capacity-
limited model ﬁtted the animals’ information signiﬁcantly better
than a simpler linear model (P = 0.026, validation test, see SI
Materials and Methods for details). Both monkeys’ capacities were
similar (3.88 monkey Sp, 3.87 monkey Si), with an overall average
of 3.88 objects [95% conﬁdence interval (CI): 3.82–3.93; SI
Materials and Methods]. In similar paradigms the capacity of an
average adult human is typically around 4 items (1).

Closer examination of the monkeys’ behavior revealed that
their total capacity was composed of two independent, smaller,
capacities in the right and left halves of visual space (hemiﬁelds).
Adding objects to the same hemiﬁeld as the target strongly de-
graded performance (Fig. 2A, rows), whereas adding objects in the
opposite hemiﬁeld had no impact (Fig. 2A, columns; ipsilateral
effect, P = 5.0 × 10−11; contralateral effect, P = 0.23; ANOVA).
The number of same-hemiﬁeld objects accounted for >95% of the
behavioral effect of the total number of objects. Behavioral per-
formance was not signiﬁcantly different between the two hemi-
ﬁelds, suggesting similar capacity in each hemisphere (target
hemiﬁeld effect, P = 0.74; ANOVA). The information the animals
had about each hemiﬁeld increased with a second object, but then
saturated, suggesting each hemiﬁeld’s capacity was ∼2 objects
(Fig. 2C; 2 > 1, P < 10−15; 3 > 2, P = 0.58, two-tailed permutation
test). Again, a nonlinear, capacity-limited model ﬁt signiﬁcantly
better than a linear one (P = 4.4 × 10−4, validation test). The es-
timated per-hemiﬁeld capacity was 1.6 objects (95% CI: 1.60–1.64;
capacity of 1.74 for Sp and 1.51 for Si, Fig. S1).

Neural activity also showed independent capacities for each
visual hemiﬁeld. For example, average object information in
LPFC neurons during the sample period decreased with increasing
number of objects in the same hemiﬁeld (Fig. 2D, Left), but not
the opposite hemiﬁeld (Fig. 2D, Right; ipsilateral effect, P = 1.4 ×
10−4; contralateral effect, P = 0.51; two-way ANOVA). We found
the same effect during the memory delay [ipsilateral effect (Ipsi),
P = 2.6 × 10−6; contralateral effect (Contra), P = 0.53; two-way
ANOVA] as well as in the LIP and FEF (Ipsi, P = 0.026 and P =
0.029; Contra, P = 0.52 and P = 0.19; two-way ANOVA; see SI
Materials and Methods for details). This result cannot reﬂect
attention to one hemiﬁeld or switching attention between them;
the monkeys could not predict which object would change and
performance was well above that expected from those strategies.
Is the brain’s capacity limit a bottom–up failure to perceptu-
ally encode objects or a top–down failure to retain objects in
memory? A perceptual encoding failure predicts that, when ca-
pacity is exceeded, object information is lost during neurons’
sensory responses and in lower-order before higher-order cortex.

Author contributions: T.J.B. and E.K.M. designed research; T.J.B. and J.E.R. performed
research; T.J.B. and M.S. analyzed data; and T.J.B. and E.K.M. wrote the paper.

The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.

Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: buschman@mit.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1104666108/-/DCSupplemental.

11252–11255 | PNAS |

July 5, 2011 | vol. 108 | no. 27

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1104666108

