Leading Edge

Review

Bacterial Genomics and Pathogen Evolution

David M. Raskin,1 Rekha Seshadri,2 Stefan U. Pukatzki,1 and John J. Mekalanos1,*
1 Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2 The Institute for Genomic Research, 9712 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, USA
*Contact: jmekalanos@hms.harvard.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.002

The availability of hundreds of bacterial genome sequences has altered the study of bacte-
rial pathogenesis, affecting both design of experiments and analysis of results. Comparative
genomics and genomic tools have been used to identify virulence factors and genes in-
volved in environmental persistence of pathogens. However, a major stumbling block in
the genomics revolution has been the large number of genes with unknown function that
have been identiﬁed in every organism sequenced to date.

Introduction
Over 250 bacterial genome sequences are currently avail-
able in public databases, representing hundreds of spe-
cies as well as multiple strains of the same species. The
study of these genomes by both computational and exper-
imental approaches has signiﬁcantly advanced our under-
standing of the physiology and pathogenicity of many
microbes and provided insights into the mechanisms and
history of genome evolution. This review will discuss spe-
ciﬁc examples, with an emphasis on how ‘‘postgenomic’’
methods have been utilized to identify genes that are es-
sential for bacterial growth or pathogenesis. There are
two general categories of postgenomic studies—those
that are based primarily on analysis of sequence informa-
tion itself and those that require some use of genomic se-
quence information but not based on direct sequence
analysis. Direct sequence analysis has the advantage of
enabling genome-level analysis of pathogens that are dif-
ﬁcult to manipulate genetically and permitting examination
of small differences such as single nucleotide polymor-
phisms (SNPs). However, the accuracy of bioinformatic
genomic annotations remains unclear since there have
been no reported attempts to conﬁrm functional assign-
ments of genes on a genome-wide scale. It is imperative
not only to improve annotation quality but also to dovetail
computational approaches with empirical studies, espe-
cially those that seek to unravel the functions of the numer-
ous hypothetical genes still found in genomes.

Multiple genome-level empirical approaches have been
developed for investigating gene function. Some do not
require prior knowledge of genomic sequence, but this re-
view will focus on those strategies that do, including a va-
riety of microarray technologies, proteomic methods, and
certain types of molecular genetic studies (e.g., genetic
footprinting techniques). These strategies have the advan-
tage of possessing some intrinsic experimental validation,
even though data are collected on the genomic scale.

Pathogenic Species in the Bacterial Genomic Era
Through a combination of critical
insight and chance,
pathogenic bacterial species were the ﬁrst free-living
organisms to be sequenced and thus have occupied

a unique place in the history of the genomic era. The ge-
nome of a laboratory strain of Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
was the ﬁrst bacterium to be sequenced and was followed
by an isolate of Mycoplasma genitalium (Fleischmann
et al., 1995; Fraser et al., 1995). In each of these cases,
the genome sequences provided immediate insights into
the biology of these bacterial species but less about
pathogenicity in part because the strains selected were
attenuated laboratory strains that had likely lost many
virulence-related loci. Nonetheless,
the genomes did
provide some explanations for curious physiological prop-
erties. For instance, growth of H. inﬂuenzae in vitro re-
quires large amounts of glutamate. The genome sequence
showed the absence of three TCA cycle genes in this spe-
cies. Glutamate can be converted to a-ketoglutarate by
glutamate dehydrogenase and then shunted into the re-
maining TCA cycle pathway, explaining the dependence
on exogenously supplied glutamate. In the case of M. gen-
italium, the genomic sequence revealed an almost com-
plete lack of enzymes involved in amino acid synthesis,
de novo nucleotide biosynthesis, and fatty acid biosynthe-
sis, providing an explanation for some of the undeﬁned
fastidious growth requirements of this species. Because
both H. inﬂuenzae and M. genitalium grow in host tissues,
these two examples illustrate that either the host milieu
can be nutrient rich or the physiology of bacteria in vivo
is very different from what is observed under laboratory
growth conditions.

The ﬁeld of comparative genomics next addressed
questions that could only be approached after multiple ge-
nomes were available for analysis. For example, after the
ﬁrst two bacterial genomes were sequenced, Mushegian
and Koonin (1996) tried to determine the minimum number
of genes necessary for life by comparing them and deter-
mining which genes were present in both. M. genitalium
contains only 468 protein-coding genes, while H. inﬂuen-
zae contains 1703 protein-coding genes. They identiﬁed
240 M. genitalium genes with orthologs in H. inﬂuenzae
but found that there were still genes missing from several
basic metabolic pathways. Based on the hypothesis that
this could have resulted from nonorthologous gene dis-
placement, they identiﬁed an additional 16 M. genitalium

Cell 124, 703–714, February 24, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 703

