3
1
0
2

 

v
o
N
5

 

 
 
]

Y
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
1
2
1

.

1
1
3
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Big Data Approach to Computational Creativity
Lav R. Varshney, Florian Pinel, Kush R. Varshney, Debarun Bhattacharjya, Angela Sch¨orgendorfer, and

Yi-Min Chee

1

Abstract

Computational creativity is an emerging branch of artiﬁcial intelligence that places computers in the center of
the creative process. Broadly, creativity involves a generative step to produce many ideas and a selective step to
determine the ones that are the best. Many previous attempts at computational creativity, however, have not been
able to achieve a valid selective step. This work shows how bringing data sources from the creative domain and
from hedonic psychophysics together with big data analytics techniques can overcome this shortcoming to yield a
system that can produce novel and high-quality creative artifacts. Our data-driven approach is demonstrated through
a computational creativity system for culinary recipes and menus we developed and deployed, which can operate
either autonomously or semi-autonomously with human interaction. We also comment on the volume, velocity,
variety, and veracity of data in computational creativity.

I. INTRODUCTION

C REATIVITY is said to be the generation of a product or service that is judged to be novel and also to be

appropriate, useful, or valuable by a knowledgeable social group [2], and is oft-said to be the pinnacle of
intelligence. Due to greater competitiveness in global markets for all industries, there is need to make product/service
development cycles more efﬁcient. Indeed creativity is the basis for “disruptive innovation and continuous re-
invention” [3]. Given limits on human creativity resources, it is important to develop technologies for greater
creativity, either operating autonomously or in collaboration with people.

Can a computer be creative? Computational creativity is concerned with machine systems that produce novel and
high-quality artifacts (broadly construed) for the pleasure and consumption of people. Such systems could produce
jokes, poems, visual art, architectural blueprints, business processes, fashion ensembles, ﬁnancial service designs,
or any other such artifact that is popularly viewed by people as creative output. In this paper, we focus primarily
on culinary recipes, which include both the set and quantities of ingredients to be used as well as the methods and
procedures of preparation. We also discuss menus, which are sequences of culinary recipes.

We focus on a speciﬁc domain because at least with human creativity, there is substantial evidence that this
cognitive ability is domain-speciﬁc [4], in the sense a good engineer may not be a good poet. Notwithstanding,
psychometric testing has indicated some correlations of ability that allows domains to be grouped into categories:
expressive creativity (visual arts, writing, humor); performance creativity (dance, drama, music); and scientiﬁc
creativity (invention, science, culinary), with architecture not related to any of these [5]. Most past attempts at
computational creativity have focused on either expressive or performance creativity [6]–[8], whereas we consider
a form of scientiﬁc creativity (but see [9], [10]).

Our computational creativity system operates in stages that are modeled after stages in human creativity [2]:
ﬁnd problem, acquire knowledge, gather related information, incubate, generate ideas, combine ideas, select best
ideas, and externalize ideas. As may be apparent, many of these stages require the processing of external big data
sets, as well as large volumes of intermediate data generated by the system itself. The staged approach not only
leads to modular system design, but also improves computer-human interaction when operating semi-autonomously.
Developing big data algorithms and systems is important, but interaction and presenting results to users in ways that
allow them to trust insights is also important [11]. In semi-autonomous mode our system takes a mixed-initiative
approach where the human and computer have a creation conversation in which each contributes ideas [12], rather
than the computer acting as a nanny, coach, or pen-pal for the human creator [13].

This work is based in part on a paper presented at the IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics and Cognitive Computing,
New York, July 2013 [1], an abstract presented at the Workshop on Information in Networks, New York, October 2013, and an abstract that
has been submitted to the ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Toronto, April 2014.
The authors are with the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY (e-mail: {lrvarshn, pinel, krvarshn, debarunb,
aschoer, ymchee}@us.ibm.com).

