European Journal of Industrial Relations

© The Author(s), 2009. Reprints and permissions: 
http://www.sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav

Volume 15 Number 1 pp 49–69    www.sagepublications.com

Torben Krings

Dublin City University, IRELAND

A Race to the Bottom? Trade Unions, 

EU Enlargement and the Free Movement 

of Labour

ABSTRACT ■ When eight countries from Central and Eastern Europe joined 
the EU in 2004, unions in some countries argued that significant wage 
differentials between the old and the new member states necessitated 
transitional restrictions on free movement, but others insisted that 
employment standards should be protected by the enforcement of rights, 
not by restrictions. This article explores variations in union policies in 
comparative perspective, examining Austria, Germany, Ireland and the UK. 
KEYWORDS: EU enlargement ■ free movement of labour ■ labour standards 
■ migration ■ trade unions 

Introduction

When Irish Ferries announced in autumn 2005 that it aimed to replace 
over 500 of its mostly unionized Irish staff with cheaper agency work-
ers  from  Eastern  Europe,  it  sparked  off  huge  public  protests.  At  a 
‘National  Day  of  Protest’  organized  by  the  Irish  Congress  of  Trade 
Unions  (ICTU)  100,000  people  went  to  the  streets  to  protest  against 
‘exploita tion’, ‘displacement’ and ‘a race to the bottom’. ICTU refused 
to  enter  negotiations  for  a  new  social  partnership  agreement  until 
issues  of  employment  standards  were  addressed  (Flynn,  2006).  Similar 
trans national  disputes  involving  workers  from  the  new  member  states 
(NMSs)  have  occurred  in  other  countries.  In  Vaxholm  in  Sweden,  the 
refusal of a Latvian construction company to pay its workers the local 
rates  prompted  a  union  blockade  of  a  building  site  in  2004  (Woolfson 
and Sommers, 2006). In Germany, allegations about underpayment and 
poor  working  conditions  emerged  in  the  meat  industry  where  service 
providers  from  Poland  paid  their  workers  ‘poverty  wages’  (Tenbrock 
and Wielinski, 2007).

These disputes illustrate the potential social consequences of the free 
movement of labour in an enlarged EU. Given significant cross-national 

DOI: 10.1177/0959680108100165

Downloaded from 

ejd.sagepub.com

 at Universitaet Osnabrueck on April 15, 2016

