Geoforum 32 (2001) 509±520

www.elsevier.com/locate/geoforum

Reviewing urban revitalisation strategies in Rio de Janeiro: from

urban project to urban management approaches

Claudio Acioly Jr.

Institute of Housing and Urban Development Studies (IHS), Architect and Urban Planner, Netherlands

Received 23 October 1999; in revised form 18 October 2000

Abstract

This paper describes key urban development strategies pursued during the last seven years by the Municipality of Rio de Janeiro,
the second largest city in Brazil. It discloses internal processes, organisational restructuring of the municipality and institutional
changes geared to increase e€ective urban management and resource mobilisation required to implement multiple sector pro-
grammes and key projects in several locations in the city like Favela Bairro and Rio Cidade Programmes, The Rio Strategic Plan,
etc. It is argued that the formation of interdepartmental working groups for better horizontal articulation of policy making and
implementation, the creation of the ®nancial and accounting unit, the decentralisation of authority towards sub-municipality levels,
and capacity strengthening of its personnel ± among other things ± have made a positive impact on the performance of local
government. The paper further highlights a signi®cant change towards policies of urban consolidation and revitalisation of declined
areas of the city supported by heavy public investments and the e€ort towards broader civil society involvement in municipal
projects. Municipal autonomy, problem-solving and result-oriented type of planning and management and organisational change
are some of the lessons pinpointed by the paper for a city of that size and complexity. Ó 2001 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd.

Keywords: Urban revitalisation projects; Management and organisational change; Urban governance

1. Introduction

This paper describes key urban development strate-
gies pursued by the Municipality of Rio de Janeiro over
the last seven years during which the local government
undertook innovative actions that resulted in noticeable
improvements in urban management. One of the ob-
jectives is to disclose some of the internal processes and
measures taken by the local government in order to
generate resources and forge e€ective management
needed to put into motion multiple sector programmes
and projects in several locations in the city. The indirect
involvement of the author with the Rio Cidade and
Favela Bairro programmes via a long-term capacity
building programme allowed for participant observation
and on-the-job assessment with those municipal sta€
who are in charge of di€erent projects. Without any
ambition to formulate a theory on urban management
the author explicitly intends to present to a wider au-
dience the peculiarities and speci®c characteristics of the

E-mail address: c.acioly@his.nl (C. Acioly Jr.).

0016-7185/01/$ - see front matter Ó 2001 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd.
PII: S 0 0 1 6 - 7 1 8 5 ( 0 1 ) 0 0 0 1 3 - 6

programmes and to show how some of them were
managed and the results accomplished. It is an intention
to recover lessons learned and an institutional memory
that otherwise would be circumscribed to the munici-
pality and to those directly involved in the programme.
The paper suggests that there have been fundamental
changes in policies towards the city. It argues that these
changes could not be brought about without supportive
measures, capacity building and organisational restruc-
turing and institutional changes needed to support new
approaches to urban problems. It is argued that or-
ganisational restructuring, the formation of interde-
partmental working groups for better articulation of
policy making and implementation, the decentralisation
of authority towards
sub-municipality levels, and
capacity building of its personnel ± among other things ±
have resulted in noticeable improvements in local gov-
ernment performance. The analysis of this experience is
particularly important given the fact that the population
has expressed widespread approval of current urban
development policies. This resulted in a remarkable
outcome of the 1996 election that guaranteed the con-
tinuation of a governing political party for the ®rst time

