McJUNKIN CORPORATION, Plaintiff and Third-Party Plaintiff-Fourth-Party Plaintiff and

888 F.2d 481 (1989)

Appellant,

v.

MECHANICALS, INC., Defendant,

Alaskan Copper Companies, Inc., Third-Party Defendant-Fourth-Party Defendant and Appellee.

No. 87-3345.

United States Court of Appeals, Sixth Circuit.

Argued March 3, 1988.

Decided November 2, 1989.

Rehearing Denied December 14, 1989.

482

*482 John P. Kiely, Ralph Mitchell (argued), Donald C. Adams, Jr., Rendigs, Fry, Kiely & Dennis, Cincinnati, Ohio, Brian
L. Buzby, Porter, Wright, Morris & Arthur, Columbus, Ohio, for McJunkin Corp.

Douglas E. Hart, Cincinnati, Ohio, for Mechanicals, Inc.

James M. Moore (argued), Cincinnati, Ohio, Gary L. Herfel, Ft. Wright, Ky., for Alaskan Copper Companies, Inc.

Before MERRITT, Chief Judge; KRUPANSKY, Circuit Judge; and ENGEL[*], Senior Circuit Judge.

ENGEL, Senior Circuit Judge.

This conflict requires a court to declare a victor in a classic Uniform Commercial Code "Battle of the Forms" under Ohio
Rev.Code ยง 1302.10, U.C.C. ยง 2-207. We must determine whether, under the facts here, a liability limitation contained in
an acknowledgment form of Appellee Alaskan Copper Companies precludes Appellant McJunkin Corporation from
recovering damages after Alaskan sold it defective goods.

The problem underlying any "battle of the forms" is that parties engaged in commerce have failed to incorporate into one
formal, signed contract the explicit terms of their contractual relationship. Instead, each has been content to rely upon
standard terms which each has included in its purchase orders or acknowledgments, terms which often conflict with
those in the other party's documents. Usually, these standard terms mean little, for a contract looks to its fulfillment and
rarely anticipates its breach. Hope springs eternal in the commercial world and expectations are usually, but not always,
realized. It is only when the good faith expectations of the parties are frustrated that the legal obligations and rights of the
parties must be precisely determined. This case presents a situation typical in any battle of the forms: it is not that the
parties' forms have said too little, but rather that they have said too much yet have expressly agreed upon too little.

483

Generally, where parties engaged in commerce enjoy parity in bargaining power, the Code acknowledges the parties'
autonomy and recognizes the parties' right to agree upon contractual terms which might otherwise violate the Code,
including liability limitations. See Ohio Rev.Code ยง 1301.02 & comment 2. As noted by the late Robert Braucher,
Harvard professor, *483 Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts and member of the Massachusetts
Commission on Uniform State Laws, the Code embodies the principle "that the intent of the parties is the keystone of
choice of law as well as of substantive rules in the field of commercial transactions." Braucher, The Legislative History of
the Uniform Commercial Code, 58 Colum.L.Rev. 798, 811 (1958).

Nevertheless, under the facts of this case, we find that Alaskan's liability limitation is inoperative. While we find that
Alaskan and McJunkin had a contract, we find that the contract existed by virtue of the parties' conduct, not by virtue of
the exchange of forms. Under Ohio Rev.Code ยง 1302.10(C), the contract thus incorporated only those terms upon which

