The Big Bang Theory
Summary:
„Leonard Hofstadter and Sheldon Cooper are both brilliant physicists working at Cal Tech in
Pasadena, California. They are colleagues, best friends, and roommates, although in all capacities
their relationship is always tested primarily by Sheldon's regimented, deeply eccentric, and non-
conventional ways. They are also friends with their Cal Tech colleagues mechanical engineer
Howard Wolowitz and astrophysicist Rajesh Koothrappali. The foursome spend their time working
on their individual work projects, playing video games, watching science-fiction movies, or reading
comic books. As they are self-professed nerds, all have little or no luck with women. When Penny, a
pretty woman and an aspiring actress from Omaha, moves into the apartment across the hall from
Leonard and Sheldon's, Leonard has another aspiration in life, namely to get Penny to be his
girlfriend.“ 

List of Characters:
Johnny Galecki as Leonard Hofstadter:
PhD– An experimental physicist with an IQ of 173, he received his PhD when he was 24 years old.
His mother, Beverly (Christine Baranski), is a neuroscientist and psychiatrist who provided little, if
any, nurturing when Leonard was growing up. Like all of the other major male characters, Leonard
is a nerd who loves video games, comic books, and Dungeons & Dragons. Leonard is also lactose
intolerant. The straight man of the series, he shares an apartment in Pasadena with Sheldon.
Leonard is smitten with his neighbor Penny when they first meet. They briefly date at the end of
season 1 and the start of season 2 and in season 3, they begin a stable romantic relationship,
however they break up at the end of season 3 when Leonard tells Penny he loves her, and she isn't
ready to reciprocate. Leonard also briefly dates Leslie and Dr. Stephanie Barnett (Sara Rue) in
season 2, and in season 4, he becomes seriously involved with Raj's sister Priya (Aarti Mann), a
successful lawyer, but she eventually returns to India and they break up in season 5 when she
admits to having cheated on him. 

Jim Parsons as Sheldon Cooper, M.A., M.S, Ph.D., Sc.D., B.S.:
Originally from Galveston, Texas, Sheldon was a child prodigy with an eidetic memory who began
college at the age of 11 (after completing the fifth grade), started graduate studies at 14, and earned
a PhD at 16. A theoretical physicist researching quantum mechanics and string theory, he has two
doctoral degrees, a PhD, and an Sc.D. However, despite his IQ of 187, he finds many routine
aspects of social situations and life in general difficult to grasp and navigate. His father died when
he was 14, and his mother, Mary (Laurie Metcalf) is a devout Christian. He also has a twin sister,
Missy (Courtney Henggeler), who later has a baby in season 7. Sheldon has a poor grasp of others'
feelings and little or no comprehension of nuances, often questioning others if a comment is
intended as sarcasm. As a result, he is extremely tactless and acts wildly inappropriately much of
the time. He is determined to have his own way, boasts of his superior intelligence, and belittles his
friends'   accomplishments,   making   him   appear   petty   and   childlike.   Sheldon   has   an   extremely
ritualized way of living (e.g., always sitting in the same spot on the sofa, or knocking on a door
three times, each time saying the name of the person he's addressing), and a compulsion to complete
things. He is also wary of germs and dislikes physical contact. Despite all these quirks, in season 4,
he begins a relationship with Amy, who eventually becomes his girlfriend during season 5. 

Kaley Cuoco as Penny:
An aspiring actress from a town outside of Omaha, Nebraska, Penny moves in across the hall from
Sheldon and Leonard in the pilot. She attends casting calls and auditions, but is not very successful.
To pay the bills, she waits and occasionally tends bar at The Cheesecake Factory, although she often
relies on the guys for free food, Wi-Fi, and help paying her rent (Sheldon once called her a
'freeloader'). Penny quits her job in season 7 and at the start of season 8 becomes a pharmaceutical
representative at Zangen after having given up hope of becoming a successful actress, and finally

