 

 
 
 

 

 Highlights of Changes from 

 
     DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

Changes made to the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria and texts are outlined in this chapter in the same order 
in which they appear in the DSM-5 classification. This is not an exhaustive guide; minor changes in text 
or wording made for clarity are not described here. It should also be noted that Section I of DSM-5 con-
tains a description of changes pertaining to the chapter organization in DSM-5, the multiaxial system, 
and the introduction of dimensional assessments (in Section III).

Terminology
The phrase “general medical condition” is replaced in DSM-5 with “another medical condition” where 
relevant across all disorders.

Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Developmental Disorder)
Diagnostic criteria for intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) emphasize the need 
for an assessment of both cognitive capacity (IQ) and adaptive functioning. Severity is determined by 
adaptive functioning rather than IQ score. The term mental retardation was used in DSM-IV. However, 
intellectual disability is the term that has come into common use over the past two decades among 
medical, educational, and other professionals, and by the lay public and advocacy groups. Moreover, a 
federal statue in the United States (Public Law 111-256, Rosa’s Law) replaces the term “mental retarda-
tion with intellectual disability. Despite the name change, the deficits in cognitive capacity beginning 
in the developmental period, with the accompanying diagnostic criteria, are considered to constitute a 
mental disorder. The term intellectual developmental disorder was placed in parentheses to reflect the 
World Health Organization’s classification system, which lists “disorders” in the International Classifica-
tion of Diseases (ICD; ICD-11 to be released in 2015) and bases all “disabilities” on the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF). Because the ICD-11 will not be adopted for 
several years, intellectual disability was chosen as the current preferred term with the bridge term for 
the future in parentheses.
 
Communication Disorders
The DSM-5 communication disorders include language disorder (which combines DSM-IV expressive 
and mixed receptive-expressive language disorders), speech sound disorder (a new name for phono-
logical disorder), and childhood-onset fluency disorder (a new name for stuttering). Also included is 
social (pragmatic) communication disorder, a new condition for persistent difficulties in the social uses 
of verbal and nonverbal communication. Because social communication deficits are one component of 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD), it is important to note that social (pragmatic) communication disorder 
cannot be diagnosed in the presence of restricted repetitive behaviors, interests, and activities (the oth-
er component of ASD). The symptoms of some patients diagnosed with DSM-IV pervasive developmen-
tal disorder not otherwise specified may meet the DSM-5 criteria for social communication disorder.

Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism spectrum disorder is a new DSM-5 name that reflects a scientific consensus that four previously 
separate disorders are actually a single condition with different levels of symptom severity in two core 

