DAKAR

Migrants’ long-distance
relationships and social
networks in Dakar

Abdou Salam Fall

SUMMARY:  This  paper  describes  the  changes  in  the  relation-
ships between migrants in Dakar and their relatives in rural home
areas, and how traditional kin structures are gradually replaced
by new solidarity networks in the city. While remittances are an
important resource for rural households, especially during the
“hungry  months”  before  the  new  harvest,  migrants’  visits  are
not linked to regular seasonal agricultural work but rather to oc-
casional participation in family ceremonies, suggesting a decrease
in temporary migration and a more permanent urban residence.

I. INTRODUCTION

THE PERSISTENCE OF strong migratory flows from rural ar-
eas to the towns, and in particular Dakar and its suburbs, is a
key problem facing Senegal. The logic of these population move-
ments is both individual and collective and is intrinsically linked
to imbalances in the areas of origin. Migrating means enlarging
one’s  living  space  and  making  a  commitment  elsewhere  on  a
temporary,  regular  or  permanent  basis.  Through  migration,
workers  relocate  and  rearrange  themselves  in  an  area  wider
than  their  original  environment.  Rather  than  simply  a  move-
ment  of  individual  players,  groups  or  communities  are  being
formed which are bringing economic units into contact across
space.

Through complex social networks, migrants maintain relation-
ships, on an occasional but more or less permanent basis, with
their  places  of  origin.  There  are  several  reasons  for  adopting
such a strategy. In some areas where the crisis in agriculture is
most severe, household dependence on contributions from mi-
grants to the city appears to be irreversible. In Serer country,
heads of household told us that “...a family with no migrants
cannot live decently.”(1)

Migration generally involves establishing new links but with-
out breaking up former relationships of a structural or func-
tional nature. The reasons given by Pontié and Lericollais pro-
vide  an  illustration  of  this  rationale  employed  by  many  rural
societies with regard to human relations:

“The  nature  of  social  and  religious,  as  well  as  economic,
relationships between migrants and their societies of origin

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 10, No. 1, April 1998

135

the 

Dr Abdou Salam Fall is a soci-
ologist  at 
Institut
Fondamental  d’Afrique  Noire
(IFAN), University Cheikh Anta
Diop, Dakar, where he teaches
urban  sociology.  His  main
research  interests  are  in  the
areas  of  urbanization,  migra-
tion, poverty, social networks
and 
local  development.

Address:  BP.  206, 
IFAN,
Université  Cheikh  Anta  Diop,
Dakar, Senegal.

1.  Fall, A.S. (1992), “Une réponse
à la crise de l’agriculture, la mi-
gration  des  Sereer  du  Siin
(Sénégal)  in  Société,  Espace,
Temps No.1, pages 138-148.

