Violence and the Social Construction
of Ethnic Identity
James D. Fearon and David D. Laitin

Paul Brass. 1997. Theft of an Idol. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Francis M. Deng. 1995. War of Visions: Con ict of Identities in the Sudan.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Bruce Kapferer. 1988. Legends of People/Myths of State: Violence, Intolerance,
and Political Culture in Sri Lanka and Australia. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
Institution Press.

John McGarry and Brendan O’Leary. 1995. Explaining Northern Ireland: Broken
Images. Oxford: Blackwell.

Ge´rard Prunier. 1995. The Rwanda Crisis: History of a Genocide. New York:
Columbia University Press.

Susan L. Woodward. 1995. Balkan Tragedy: Chaos and Dissolution After the
Cold War. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Is there case study evidence of a relationship between the social construction of
ethnic identities and the probability of ethnic war? The mere observation that ethnic
identities are socially constructed does not by itself explain ethnic violence and may
not even be particularly relevant. Our purpose here is to see if we can reject the null
hypothesis that the social construction of ethnicity has little or no bearing on the
likelihood of ethnic violence. Our procedure is to examine closely the narratives of
expert observers of some highly violent episodes of ethnic relations. Although a
different set of case studies might yield different overall conclusions, the narratives
we examined contain useful clues about the mechanisms that link identity construc-
tion and ethnic violence.1

We are indebted to Paul Brass, Kanchan Chandra, Francis Deng, Lynn Eden, Page Fortna, Gary Her-
rigel, Peter Katzenstein, Rene´ Lemarchand, John McGarry, William Sewell, Jack Snyder, Ronald Suny,
and Susan Woodward for comments on earlier drafts of this article.

1. On mechanisms and social explanation, see Hedstro¨m and Swedberg 1998.

International Organization 54, 4, Autumn 2000, pp. 845–877
r 2000 by The IO Foundation and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology

