State Capacity and Economic Development: A Network Approach∗

Daron Acemoglu†

Camilo Garcia-Jimeno‡
October 22, 2014

James A. Robinson§

Abstract

We study the direct and spillover eﬀects of local state capacity using the network of Colombian munici-
palities. We model the determination of local and national state capacity as a network game in which each
municipality, anticipating the choices and spillovers created by other municipalities and the decisions of
the national government, invests in local state capacity and the national government chooses the presence
of the national state across municipalities to maximize its own payoﬀ. We then estimate the parameters of
this model using reduced-form instrumental variables techniques and structurally (with GMM or SMM).
To do so we exploit both the structure of the network of municipalities over which spillovers take place
and the historical roots of local state capacity as the source of exogenous variation. These historical in-
struments are related to the presence of colonial royal roads and local presence of the colonial state in
the 18th century, factors which we argue are unrelated to current provision of public goods and prosper-
ity except through their impact on their own and neighbors’ local state capacity. Our estimates of the
eﬀects of state presence on prosperity are large and also indicate that state capacity decisions are strategic
complements across municipalities. Bringing all municipalities below median state capacity to the median,
without taking into account equilibrium responses of other municipalities increases median fraction of the
population above poverty from 57% to 60%. Approximately 57% of this is due to direct eﬀects and 43% to
spillovers. However, if we take the equilibrium response of other municipalities into account, the median
would instead increase to 68%, a sizable change driven by equilibrium network eﬀects.

JEL Classiﬁcation: H4, H7, P16.
Keywords: Colombia, economic development, networks, public goods, state capacity.

∗We are grateful to Alberto Ciancio, Amanda Culp, and Nicolas Idrobo for superb research assistance, and to the Editor,
ﬁve anonymous referees, Maria Angelica Bautista, Flavio Cunha, Frank Ditraglia, Andrew Foster, Elena Paltseva, James
Poterba, Pascual Restrepo, Petra Todd, Ken Wolpin, Roman Zarate, staﬀ at the Cartographic Modeling Lab at Penn, and
various seminar participants for valuable suggestions. Acemoglu gratefully acknowledges ﬁnancial support from ARO MURI
W911NF-12-1-0509.

†Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. daron@mit.edu
‡Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania. gcamilo@sas.upenn.edu
§Government Department, Harvard University. jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu

