R E V I E W S

Spectral fingerprints of large-scale 
neuronal interactions

Markus Siegel1*, Tobias H. Donner2* and Andreas K. Engel3

Abstract | Cognition results from interactions among functionally specialized but widely 
distributed brain regions; however, neuroscience has so far largely focused on characterizing 
the function of individual brain regions and neurons therein. Here we discuss recent studies 
that have instead investigated the interactions between brain regions during cognitive 
processes by assessing correlations between neuronal oscillations in different regions of the 
primate cerebral cortex. These studies have opened a new window onto the large-scale 
circuit mechanisms underlying sensorimotor decision-making and top-down attention. We 
propose that frequency-specific neuronal correlations in large-scale cortical networks may 
be ‘fingerprints’ of canonical neuronal computations underlying cognitive processes.

Spectral analysis
A general term for analysis 
techniques (for example, Fourier 
transform or wavelet transform) 
that decompose time domain 
signals into their different 
frequency components.

Multi-microelectrode 
recordings
Simultaneous recordings of 
single- or multi-unit activity 
from multiple electrodes 
implanted in the brain.

1 Centre for Integrative 
Neuroscience, University of 
Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, 
Germany.
2 Department of Psychology, 
University of Amsterdam, 
1018 WB Amsterdam,  
The Netherlands.
3 Department of 
Neurophysiology and 
Pathophysiology, University 
Medical Center Hamburg-
Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, 
Germany.
*These authors contributed 
equally.
Correspondence to M.S. and 
T.H.D. e-mails: markus.
siegel@uni-tuebingen.de; 
t.h.donner@uva.nl 
doi:10.1038/nrn3137
Published online  
11 January 2012

Cognitive processing is highly selective, integrative and 
flexible. This is achieved through the transient forma-
tion of large ‘coalitions of neurons’1, which are widely 
distributed across many brain areas, exchange signals in 
a specific manner and compete with each other. Just as 
in politics, one coalition typically rules until it is over-
turned by another. In the brain, the winning coalition 
governs a percept, thought or action. Thus, understand-
ing the neuronal basis of cognition requires an under-
standing of how transient coalitions of neurons form, 
compete and dissolve.

Around 30 years ago, it was suggested that the syn-
chronization of oscillatory neuronal activity might have 
a key role in the integration of sensory signals during 
perceptual organization2,3. Several investigations into the 
visual system provided evidence for4–9 and against10–12 
this hypothesis. One decade ago, three influential 
Reviews in this journal further highlighted the func-
tional significance of neuronal oscillations for the large-
scale neuronal interactions underlying cognition13–15. 
Since then, several groups have begun to unravel these 
interactions and their dynamics, aided by the develop-
ment of powerful new measurement and analysis tools.
Here, we discuss recent studies characterizing the 
interactions between distant regions of the primate 
cerebral cortex through the study of correlated oscilla-
tions. We use sensorimotor decision-making and top-
down visual attention as showcases. Although most 
other cognitive processes (for example, multisensory 
integration16–19) also involve large-scale interactions, 
we focus on decision-making and attention for two 
reasons. First, both processes critically depend on the 

interaction between neuronal populations located in 
widely separated cortical areas. Second, both have been 
the focus of several recent studies linking interactions 
between brain areas to cognition. These studies showed 
that large-scale cortical interactions typically involve 
frequency-specific, correlated neuronal oscillations. The 
detailed analyses of such frequency-specific interactions 
indicate tight mechanistic links between processes that 
may seem different at the behavioural level of analysis. 
They have also been able to dissociate between seem-
ingly analogous processes. These insights could hardly 
have emerged from analysing only local neuronal activ-
ity patterns. Thus, the evidence discussed in this Review 
suggests that frequency-specific correlated oscillations 
in distributed cortical networks may provide indices, or 
‘fingerprints’, of the network interactions that underlie 
cognitive processes. We propose that these fingerprints 
may index canonical neuronal computations underly-
ing cognition, which are commonly inferred, but not 
directly accessed.

A window onto cortical interactions
We focus on electrophysiological studies that have 
characterized frequency-specific neuronal dynamics 
by means of spectral analysis of non-invasive electroen-
cephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG) 
or invasive multi-microelectrode recordings. Frequency-
specific cortical population signals — which are often 
narrow band and as such reflect neuronal oscillations — 
are markers of the underlying neuronal network interac-
tions2,13,14,20–25. Thus, measures of the association between 
brain areas based on such frequency-specific signals  

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE 

 VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 121

© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

