Freedom and Necessity 
A. J. Ayer 

When I am  said to have done something of my 
own  free  will  it  is  implied  that  I  could  have 
acted  otherwise;  and  it  is  only  when  it  is  be(cid:173)
lieved  that  I could have  acted  otherwise  that  I 
am  held  to  be  morally  responsible  for  what  I 
have done. For a man is not thought to be moral(cid:173)
ly responsible for an action that it was not in his 
power to  avoid.  But if human behaviour is  en(cid:173)
tirely  governed  by  causal  laws,  it  is  not  clear 
how  any  action  that  is  done  could  ever  have 
been avoided. It may be said of the agent that he 
would have acted otherwise if the causes of his 
action had been different,  but they  being  what 
they were, it seems to follow that he was bound 
to act as  he did.  Now  it is  commonly assumed 
both that men are capable of acting freely, in the 
sense that is required to make them morally re(cid:173)
sponsible,  and that human behaviour is entirely 
governed by causal laws:  and it is  the apparent 
conflict  between  these  two  assumptions  that 
gives  rise  to  the  philosophical  problem  of the 
freedom of the will. 

Confronted with  this  problem,  many  people 
will be inclined to agree with Dr. Johnson:  'Sir, 
we  know  our  will  is  free,  and  there's  an  end 
on't.'  But,  while  this  does  very  well  for  those 
who  accept  Dr.  Johnson's  premiss,  it  would 
hardly  convince  anyone  who  denied  the  free(cid:173)
dom of the  will.  Certainly,  if we  do  know  that 
our wills are free, it follows that they are so. But 
the logical reply to this  might be that since our 
wills  are  not  free,  it  follows  that  no  one  can 
know that they are: so that if anyone claims, like 
Dr.  Johnson,  to know  that they are,  he  must be 
mistaken. What is evident, indeed, is that people 
often believe themselves to be acting freely; and 
it  is  to  this  'feeling'  of  freedom  that  some 
philosophers appeal when they wish, in the sup(cid:173)
posed interests of morality, to prove that not all 
human  action  is  causally  determined.  But  if 
these philosophers are right in their assumption 
that a man cannot be acting freely if his action is 
causally determined, then the fact that someone 
feels  free  to  do,  or not  to  do,  a  certain  action 
does not prove that he really is  so. It may prove 
that the  agent does not himself know what it is 
that makes  him act in  one  way rather than  an-

other: but from the fact that a man is unaware of 
the  causes of his  action, it does  not follow  that 
no such causes exist. 

So much may  be  allowed to  the  determinist; 
but  his  belief that  all  human  actions  are  sub(cid:173)
servient to causal laws still remains to be justi(cid:173)
fied.  If,  indeed,  it is  necessary that every event 
should have a cause, then the rule must apply to 
human behaviour as  much  as  to  anything  else. 
But why should it be supposed that every event 
must have a cause? The contrary is not unthink(cid:173)
able. Nor is the law of universal causation a nec(cid:173)
essary presupposition of scientific thought. The 
scientist may try to discover causal laws, and in 
many cases he succeeds; but sometimes he  has 
to  be  content  with  statistical  laws,  and  some(cid:173)
times he comes upon events which, in the pres(cid:173)
ent state of his knowledge, he is not able to sub(cid:173)
sume under any  law  at all.  In  the  case of these 
events  he  assumes  that  if  he  knew  more  he 
would  be  able  to  discover  some  law,  whether 
causal or statistical, which would enable him to 
account  for  them.  And  this  assumption  cannot 
be disproved. For however far he may have car(cid:173)
ried his investigation, it is always open to him to 
carry it further; and it is always conceivable that 
if he  carried  it  further  he  would  discover  the 
connection  which  had  hitherto  escaped  him. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  also  conceivable  that  the 
events  with which he  is  concerned are  not sys(cid:173)
tematically  connected  with  any  others:  so  that 
the reason why he does not discover the sort of 
laws  that he requires is  simply that they do  not 
obtain. 

Now in the case of human conduct the search 
for explanations has  not in  fact been altogether 
fruitless.  Certain  scientific  laws  have  been  es(cid:173)
tablished; and with the help of these laws we do 
make a number of successful predictions about 
the ways in which different people will behave. 
But these predictions do not always cover every 
detail. We may be able to predict that in certain 
circumstances  a  particular  man  will  be  angry, 
without being able to prescribe the precise form 
that  the  expression  of his  anger  will  take.  We 
may  be  reasonably  sure  that he  will  shout,  but 
not  sure how loud his  shout will  be,  or exactly 

From  Philosophical Essays (Macmillan,  1954).  Reprinted with permission of the publisher. 

662 

