Using	Corpora	to	Explore	Syntactic	Variation	
		In	this	exercise,	we	will	try	to	gain	some	hands-on	experience	in	working	with	
corpora	in	order	to	explore	syntactic	variation.	Here	is	what	you	need:	
	
•  You	will	be	working	in	groups.	Each	group	needs	at	least	one	computer	
which	is	able	to	run	AntConc:	
http://www.laurenceanthony.net/software/antconc/	
•  You	will	need	access	to	one	or	several	of	the	International	Corpus	of	English	
(ICE)	national	subcorpora:	
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/pwwvnanhlh5suda/AACfTfToRruQMJftNeGJ
u-eka?dl=0	
These	corpora	are	divided	into	discrete	text	types	(e.g.	private	conversations,	
news	writing,	academic	writing,	etc.)	according	to	the	same	standard	and	
proportions,	so	comparisons	of	different	text	types	within	one	ICE	corpus	
and	of	general	tendencies	across	different	ICE	corpora	are	reliable	and	can	be	
taken	as	representative.	
Unfortunately,	since	different	research	teams	compiled	the	different	ICE	
corpora,	the	format	in	which	they	are	available	can	be	slightly	different.	Each	
subcorpus	comes	with	a	manual	that	explains	how	the	different	text	types	
are	coded.	
•  Finally,	there	is	a	document	on	StudIP	which	describes	some	currently	
ongoing	changes	in	the	syntax	of	English.	
	First,	take	a	look	at	the	document	and	read	the	outlines	of	the	different	processes	of	
change.	Most	of	these	are	well	documented	for	British	and	American	English,	but	not	
necessarily	for	the	linguistic	reality	in	smaller	English-speaking	countries	like	
Jamaica,	Nigeria,	or	sometimes	even	New	Zealand.	So	there	is	a	real	chance	that	
today	you	may	discover	something	no-one	has	ever	discovered	before.	
	Think	about	what	change	you	find	most	interesting	for	a	little	analysis	project.	
Maybe	there	is	just	something	about	a	certain	grammatical	construction	that	makes	
it	generally	interesting	to	you,	maybe	you	feel	like	searching	for	one	type	of	
construction	in	a	corpus	will	be	easier	than	searching	for	another.	Whatever	the	
case,	settle	on	one	and	start	thinking	about	how	you	might	go	about	researching	it.	
Some	of	the	questions	to	consider	include:	
•  Does	one	variant	occur	more	in	spoken	or	in	written	language?	
•  Does	formality	play	a	role?	How	could	this	be	measured	in	a	corpus?	
•  Are	there	any	purely	linguistic	effects	that	constrain	or	promote	the	feature	
(e.g.	are	there	certain	types	of	verb	or	constructions	the	progressive	aspect	
likes	or	doesn’t	like)?	
•  How	do	two	different	varieties	compare	in	terms	of	the	overall	frequency	of	
the	phenomenon	you	are	interested	in,	and	is	the	distribution	of	the	
phenomenon	by	text	type	the	same	in	both	varieties?	

	

1	

