R E V I E W S

BACTERIOCINS: DEVELOPING 
INNATE IMMUNITY FOR FOOD
Paul D. Cotter*, Colin Hill* and R. Paul Ross‡
Abstract | Bacteriocins are bacterially produced antimicrobial peptides with narrow or broad host 
ranges. Many bacteriocins are produced by food-grade lactic acid bacteria, a phenomenon 
which offers food scientists the possibility of directing or preventing the development of specific 
bacterial species in food. This can be particularly useful in preservation or food safety 
applications, but also has implications for the development of desirable flora in fermented food. 
In this sense, bacteriocins can be used to confer a rudimentary form of innate immunity to 
foodstuffs, helping processors extend their control over the food flora long after manufacture.

F O O D  M I C R O B I O LO G Y

 

Perhaps the oldest and most widespread antimicrobial 
strategy in living systems is the use of antimicrobial 
peptides by the innate immune systems of many forms 
of life, from insects to plants to humans. Antimicrobial 
peptides can be fast acting and have broad-spectrum 
activity, which diminishes the possibility of resis-
tance developing in target species. One example of 
anti microbial peptides are the defensins, such as the 
α-defensins, which are produced by neutrophils in the 
small intestine and which act to reinforce the physical 
barriers of the mucosal surface. However, the pro-
duction of antimicrobial peptides is not confined to 
multi cellular organisms. BACTERIOCINS are ribosomally 
synthesized antimicrobial peptides produced by one 
bacterium that are active against other bacteria, either 
in the same species (narrow spectrum), or across 
genera (broad spectrum) and, as with host defence 
peptides1, cell signalling mechanisms can also be 
involved. Producer organisms are immune to their own 
bacteriocin(s), a property that is mediated by specific 
immunity proteins.

It has been suggested that between 30–99% of the 
Bacteria and Archaea make at least one bacteriocin2,3, 
although genome analyses should ultimately provide 
a more definitive figure4,5. Many bacteriocins are 
produced by food-grade lactic acid bacteria (LAB), 
and this offers the possibility of manipulating food 
microbial ecosystems in a deliberate fashion — for 

example, by using bacteriocins to protect food against 
contamination with, or prevent the growth of, specific 
pathogenic bacteria. Alternatively, narrow-host-range 
bacteriocins can be used to influence a microbial 
population in a specific ecosystem towards a particu-
lar outcome in which a desirable strain predominates 
(competitive exclusion). In this sense, bacteriocins can 
potentially be used as a form of innate immunity in 
food to augment physical, physiological (for example, 
pH) and chemical preservatives, and to influence the 
probable final population in complex food systems.

The first description of bacteriocin-mediated inhi-
bition was reported 80 years ago, when antagonism 
between strains of Escherichia coli was first disco vered6. 
Originally called ‘colicins’, to reflect the original pro-
ducer organism, gene-encoded antimicrobial peptides 
produced by bacteria are now referred to as ‘bacterio-
cins’. Although the deliberate use of bacteriocins as 
preservatives in food was formally proposed in 1951 
REF. 7, it is likely that mankind has benefited from 
the serendipitous production of bacteriocins in food 
in the 8,000 years since cheese and other fermented 
foods were first manufactured. Many studies have 
revealed that the LAB used in cheese manufacture to 
convert lactose to lactic acid also produce bacteriocins 
that can influence the composition of the complex 
cheese microflora and potentially inhibit adventitious 
spoilage or pathogenic bacteria. Importantly, in 1928 

BACTERIOCINS
Bacterially produced, small, 
heat-stable peptides that are 
active against other bacteria and 
to which the producer has a 
specific immunity mechanism. 
Bacteriocins can have a narrow 
or broad target spectrum.

Alimentary Pharmabiotic 
Centre, *Microbiology 
Department, University 
College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
‡Moorepark Biotechnology 
Centre, Teagasc, Cork, 
Ireland.
Correspondence to C.H. 
e-mail: c.hill@ucc.ie
doi:10.1038/nrmicro1240

NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 3 | OCTOBER 2005 | 777

