INFANCY, 7(2),  183-206 
Copyright 0 2005, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

The Developmental Trajectory 

of Nonadjacent Dependency Learning 

Rebecca G6mez 

Department of Psychology 

University of Arizona 

Jessica Maye 

Depurtment of Communication Sciences and Disorders 

Northwestern  University 

We investigated the developmental trajectory of nonadjacent dependency learning in 
an artificial language. Infants were exposed to  1 of 2 artificial languages with utter- 
ances of the form [aXc or bXd] (Grammar 1) or [aXd or bXc] (Grammar 2). In both 
languages, the grammaticality of an utterance depended on the relation between the 
1 st and 3rd elements, whereas the intervening element varied freely. High variability 
of the middle element is known to contribute to perception of nonadjacent dependen- 
cies (Gbmez, 2002). but the developmental trajectory of such learning is unknown. 
Experiment  1 replicated the study of Gbmez with a younger age group and a more 
subtle variability manipulation. Twelve-month-olds failed to track nonadjacent de- 
pendencies under conditions tested here (Experiments 2a and 2b), but by  15 months, 
infants are beginning to track this structure (Experiment 3). Such learning has impli- 
cations for understanding how infants might begin to acquire similar structure in nat- 
ural language. 

Much work has focused on how infants might learn adjacent dependencies in se- 
quential  structure. For instance, Kirkham, Slemmer, and Johnson  (2002) showed 
that by 2 months of age, infants can track co-occurrence frequencies in streams of 
visually presented objects. By 8 months, infants can track conditional probabilities 
in running speech ( A s h ,  Saffran, & Newport,  1998; Saffran, A s h ,  & Newport, 
1996) and in visually presented scenes (Fiser & A s h ,  2002). By  12 months, they 

Requests for reprints shouId be sent to Rebecca GCtmez, Department of Psychology, University of 

Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721LOo68. E-mail: rgomez@u.arizona.edu 

