f-*---J nrr-liii.T;1 An Introduction to the Analysis of Drama 
Suit the action to the word, the word  to the action, with this special observance, that 
you o'erstep not the modesty of nature. For  anything so o'erdone is from the purpose of 
playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is to hold as 'twere the mirror up 
to nature. 
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, Hamlet, III,  ii, 17-22. 
#)  A Text Written for Performance: Fundamental Features 

of Dramatic Composition 

i

~

~

~

 

~

i

~

~

~
l
bemeen 
text arid 

h

Aims and 
content of 
this chapter 

When, in the Passage quoted above, Hamlet advises the actors 
~
performing the play within a play in Hamlet to coordinate word 
and action, language and gesture, he highlights the close relation- 
ship between the written  text of  a  drama and its performance 
in the theatre. Hamlet's comment that the first and ultimate goal 
of acting is "to hold [...I  the mirror up to nature" is admittedly his- 
torically determined and based on a particular conception of lit- 
erature as imitation of nature; however, his reference to the inter- 
play between word and gesture alludes to a central aspect of the 
theory of  drama  and identifies two  important  components of 
drama. 
The main goal of this chapter is to identify the fundamental fea- 
tures of the composition of drama, to give a preliminary overview 
of  some of  the fundamentals of  the  analysis  of  drama and to 
introduce the most important categories and transferable meth- 
ods of drama analysis. Beginning with the tension between drama 
and theatre, we will examine some constitutive features of  dra- 
matic texts. Following this, a  communication model for drama 
will be developed that also takes into account the specificities of 
the theatrical context. A short introduction will then be given to 
the basics of a semiotics of theatre, which has increased awareness 
of the part played by non-verbal theatrical codes. The remainder 
of the chapter will be devoted to a Summary of the most important 
terms and models used to describe the various elements and struc- 
tures of dramatic texts. 
Dramatic texts differ from other literary genres in their commu- 
~h~ dra- 
mat;c text  as  nication situation. It is important to remember that, in contrast 
to an essay or a poem, a dramatic text is not primarily written to 
script arid 
be read, but rather as a script for a theatre performance. Dramas 
the 
are therefore texts that are written to be performed as plays, and 
this performance  requires not only a  script, but also the entire 

Theatre per- 
formances 
as rnultirne- 
dial forms of 
presentation 

apparatus of theatre production, which often includes consider- 
able resources in terms of personnel and organisation. 
It is true that dramatic texts are generally written by an author and 
read by individual recipients; however, when a play is performed, 
the communication  situation  is entirely  different. Several indi- 
vidual~ (for example, director, dramatic advisor, set-designers and 
actors/actresses) are involved in the production of a play; perform-  tion 
ances are usually attended by large audiences. This phenomenon 
is referred to as "[tlhe collective nature of production  and reception" 
(PFISTER 1988: 11). The few dramas that are produced primarily as 
reading material do not change the fact that watching, and not 
reading, is the most appropriate mode of reception for drama. 
The process of  preparing  a drama for performance represents a 
form of literary adaptation, in that it involves substituting another 
medium for the literary text (see chapter 6.3.). While dramatic 
texts only exist in written form, theatre performances use non- 
verbal as well as verbal modes of communication: the theatrical 
realisation of a dramatic text involves an acoustic (voices, noises, 
music) and an optical dimension (set, presentation of the charac- 
ters, gesture, facial expression), as well as occasionally engaging 
other modes of sensory perception. We can describe a theatre per- 
formance as a "multimedial form ofpresentation" (PFISTER 1988: 6), 
because the performance of a play draws on a wide repertoire of 
verbal and non-verbal signs and codes, as well as on a variety of 
modes of perception or communication channels. 
Drama and theatre are therefore closely related; the dramatic text 
lnteraction 
functions as the script on which a performance is based. Given  bemeen 
that text and performance are valued equally as artistic works, it  drama arid 
is perhaps most appropriate to regard the dramatic text "as a text 
theatre 
to be performed, as a literary artefact conceived with a view to its per- 
formance" (HOFELE 1991: l l). This avoids ascribing greater value 
to either text or performance, and instead does justice to both as 
distinct modes or media of artistic expression. 
As  many features of a dramatic work can be varied in perform-  Variations in 
ance and the actors generally have considerable scope for indi- 
vidual interpretation, every performance should be regarded as  „d  produc- 
an independent 'theatrical work of art'. A comparison of the var-  tion 
ious performances of any individual drama illustrates this capac- 
ity for variation, which affects in particular the presentation  of 
characters, gesture and setting, whereas the outlines of the action 
and the temporal structure of a drama tend to be prescribed  by 
the text. Theatre performance differs in various ways from drama 
as written text, the most obvious difference being that the perform- 
ance is a transient event that can never be exactly reproduced. 

I 

1  An lntroduction to the Analysis of  Drama 

A Text Written for  Performance: Fundamc.ril,il Fra1iirc.t ol Drnni,illc  Cc,i~i~otllloii 7'1 

