Environment and Planning A 2011, volume 43, pages 988 ^ 997

doi:10.1068/a43505

Guest editorial

Commodity chains and the uneven geographies of global capitalism: a disarticulations
perspective
Over the course of the last decade, the commodity chain construct has informed
many studies of international trade and production networks in sociology, geography,
history, and, more recently, anthropology. The interdisciplinary appeal of the chain
heuristic lies in its ability to ground abstract-prone analysis of economic globalization
in the everyday practices of firms, workers, households, states, and consumers. The
commodity chain concept was developed by Terence Hopkins and Immanuel
Wallerstein in the late 1970s to differentiate their understanding of capitalism’s territo-
rial scope from methodologically nationalist approaches to economic change. Instead of
understanding economic development as a sequential process whereby national markets
evolve in the direction of expanded foreign trade, the authors suggested

‘‘[starting] with a radically different presumption. Let us conceive of something
we shall call, for want of a better conventional term, ‘commodity chains.’ What we
mean by such chains is the following: take an ultimate consumable item and trace
back the set of inputs that culminated in this item, including prior transformations,
the raw materials, the transportation mechanisms, the labor input into each of the
material processes, the food inputs into the labor. This linked set of processes we
call a commodity chain. If the ultimate consumable were, say, clothing, the chain
would include the manufacture of the cloth, the yarn, etc, the cultivation of the
cotton, as well as the reproduction of the labor forces involved in these productive
activities’’ (1977, page 128).

For Hopkins and Wallerstein a final commodity is the outcome of linked processes
connecting actors and activities across space; by studying the processes constituting a
particular commodity chain, it is possible to get analytical purchase on the complex
and concrete determinations of the global economy.

World-systems theorists mobilized the chain construct to reveal the emergence of
an international division of labor incorporating core and peripheral countries alike
into a global capitalist economy. Later iterations, including Gereffi’s global commodity
chains (GCC) framework (Gereffi and Korzeniewicz, 1994) and the global value chains
(GVC) approach (Gereffi et al, 2005; Gibbon and Ponte, 2005), have shifted from
the long-range, macrohistorical perspective of world-systems theory to a more
industry-centred and firm-centered model of organizational analysis.(1)

In reaction to this recent turn, several scholars sympathetic to the overall thrust of
the commodity chain project have called for the need to ‘embed’, ‘territorialize’, or
‘spatialize’ studies of transnational commodity production (Bair, 2005; Dicken et al,
2001; Dussel Peters, 2008). As evident from these disparate terms, these critiques do
not represent a coherent theoretical agenda; rather they indicate a shared skepticism
about the influence of microsocial network analysis and transaction cost economics on
the study of commodity cum value chains (see Bair, 2005).

Just as the original commodity chain framework burst disciplinary bounds, so too
has the ambit of its critique. Economic geographers argue that the empirical focus on

(1) While the GCC and later GVC approaches share an interest in the chain as an analytic for
comprehending the connections between various kinds of economic activities, there are important
differences between them which have been discussed elsewhere (Bair, 2005; Gibbon and Ponte, 2005).

