FIVE

Solidifying affect: Structures of feeling, 

habitus and emotional capital

We are talking about characteristic elements of impulse, restraint and 
tone; specifically affective elements of consciousness and relationships: 
not feeling against thought, but thought as felt and feeling as thought: 
practical consciousness of a present kind, in a living and interrelating 
continuity. We are then defining these elements as a ‘structure’: as a set, 
with specific internal relations, at once interlocking and in tension. Yet 
we are also defining a social experience which is still in process, often 
indeed not yet recognized as social but taken to be private, idiosyncratic, 
and  even  isolating,  but  which  in  analysis  (though  rarely  otherwise) 
has its emergent, connecting, and dominant characteristics, indeed its 
specific hierarchies. These are more often recognizable at a later stage, 
when they have been (as often happens) formalized, classified, and in 
many cases built into institutions and formations. By that time the case 
is different; a new structure of feeling will usually already have begun 
to form, in the true social present. (Raymond Williams, 1977, p. 132)

… personality has to be seen as social practice and not as an entity 
distinct  from  ‘society’.  Personality  is  what  people  do,  just  as  social 
relations  are  what  people  do,  and  the  doings  are  the  same.  (Robert 
Connell, 1987, p. 220)

In the previous chapter I looked at affective practice as a lively, situated communi-
cative act. I was trying to elucidate the performative patterns in affective episodes 
and  their  moment-by-moment  organisation.  The  multimodal  flows  involved 
in  Lori’s  road  rage  studied  by  Jack  Katz  (1999)  were  a  good  illustration,  as  she 
screwed up her face, wagged her finger, and then stifled her display, afraid of the 
consequences. I noted the kinds of social and material configurations that make 
affective moments like these possible, but my main concern was with the here-
and-now of affective action and affective–discursive meaning-making. 

In  this  chapter  I  want  to  pay  more  attention  to  persistence,  repetition  and 
power, and the continuities threading through these kinds of situated moments. 

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   102

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

