AELP Writing: Theme & Rheme 

 

 

 

 

Theme & Rheme: Giving your Text Cohesion 

 
Over  the  course  of  this  term,  your  Lektor  will  be  providing  you  with  advice  on  how  to  construct 
introductions  and  conclusions,  and  how  to  package  information  and  argument  into  paragraphs 
(including  the  use  of  topic  sentences).  A  further  crucial  element  on  our  journey  through  the 
technicalities of writing is how to package information at the clause level. This topic is important to 
you because English clause structures are less flexible than German ones. The following explanations 
and examples are taken from Mona Baker In Other Words (2011) pp133 ff. and Bloor & Bloor The 
Functional Analysis of English (2013) pp 74 ff. 
 
 
Theme & Rheme: A clause is made up of two “segments”: theme and rheme. 
 

 
I. Theme is basically “what the sentence is all about” and serves two main purposes: 
 
• 
 
 
• 
 

it tells you where the sentence is heading, referring forwards to the addition of new 
information which has yet to be stated. 

It  acts  as  a  point  of  orientation,  referring  backwards  to  what  has  been  stated  in 
previous sentences, and 

heavenly bodies in the sky. 

 
 
E.g.   Ptolemy’s model provided a reasonably accurate system for predicting the positions of 
 
 
In this sentence, Ptolemy’s model is the theme because it is what the sentence is all about. It is (in this 
case) also at the front of the sentence as is common in the S + V structure of English sentences. 
 
 
See  how  the  positioning  of  theme  works  in  the  following  extract  (Bloor  74).  Here,  the  themes  are 
highlighted in bold type for ease of identification: 
 

Madrid underwent significant  social changes in  the late 19th century. The city  began to expand 
north,  with  the  construction  of  Chamberi  and  Salamanca,  and  the  railway  came  along  with 
electricity, trams and a new canal. 

 

 
 
II. Rheme is basically what the writer wants to say about the theme. It is the most important 
part of a clause/sentence because it is actually what the writer or speaker wants to say about the topic 
(theme)  they  have  introduced.  So  the  rheme  in  the  first  example  above  is:  provided  a  reasonably 
accurate system for predicting the positions of heavenly bodies in the sky. 
 

