Tabellerna satta Kontrolleras noga
Kolla Figur1 sid 9 – fungerar den i s/v 

REPRODUCING AND RESHAPING ETHNIC RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION IN STOCKHOLM

REPRODUCING AND RESHAPING ETHNIC 

RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION IN STOCKHOLM: 
THE ROLE OF SELECTIVE MIGRATION MOVES

by

Roger Andersson

ANDERSSON, R. (2013): ‘Reproducing and reshaping ethnic res­
idential segregation in Stockholm: the role of selective migration 
moves’,  Geografiska  Annaler:  Series  B,  Human  Geography  95 
(2):163–187.

ABSTRACT. This paper deals with the issues of selective migra­
tion moves, and the production and reproduction of immigrant-
dense neighbourhoods in Stockholm, Sweden. It has been shown 
earlier that selective migration, that is, socioeconomic and eth­
nic  differences  between  those  leaving,  entering  and  staying  in 
so-called deprived neighbourhoods, reproduces these neighbour­
hoods’ characteristics of being poor and immigrant dense. Key 
concepts launched to inform such studies and derived from the US 
segregation discourse are “white flight” and “white avoidance”, 
meaning that native people (or white people in the US case) tend 
to leave neighbourhoods experiencing growing numbers of im­
migrants (black people) and which they also tend to avoid mov­
ing into such neighbourhoods. Using a complete set of geo-coded 
longitudinal individual data for the 2005–2008 Stockholm County 
population, this paper contributes to our understanding of ethnic 
differences in the intra-urban migration system. Three empirical 
questions  are  addressed:  what  individual  characteristics  distin­
guish (1) those who move into neighbourhoods experiencing rap­
idly increasing immigrant densities from those moving elsewhere 
in the urban region; (2) those who leave neighbourhoods expe­
riencing rapidly increasing immigrant densities from those who 
stay put; (3) those who move in the direction of higher immigrant 
densities from those moving into lower densities? Results from 
multivariate statistical analyses provide support for the avoidance 
hypothesis but less support for the flight hypothesis. When con­
trolling  for  a  range  of  individual  and  neighbourhood  attributes 
there is clear evidence that native-born Swedes are less inclined 
than most immigrant categories to move into immigrant dense are­
as while ethnic origin does not seem to matter much when explain­
ing who leaves such areas.

Keywords: ethnic segregation, flight avoidance, longitudinal data, 
selective migration, Sweden

Introduction
Ethnic residential segregation is a concern for pol­
iticians  and  urban  planners  and  has  consequently 
generated  substantial  interest  from  researchers  in 
different social science disciplines and in a grow­
ing number of countries. While this issue has long 
been on the agenda, especially in the USA and South 
Africa, rather limited interest was paid to segrega­
tion in European countries before the 1990s. Now, 

following  from  a  discourse  that  links  segregation 
with the perceived failure of integrating immigrants 
into host societies, the issue is vividly debated in 
countries such as France, the UK, the Netherlands, 
Belgium, Germany, and in Scandinavian countries 
including Sweden (Bolt et al. 2010). The topic is 
also increasingly discussed in Southern Europe, not 
least in the context of the financial crisis and rising 
inequalities (Arapoglou 2012; Kandylis et al. 2012).
 
If  one  believes  that  spatial  segregation  is  the 
cause of the lack of integration characterizing life 
for many immigrants – especially more recently ar­
rived refugee immigrants from the Middle East and 
Africa – it is natural to try to affect segregation pat­
terns  and  processes.  Such  attempts  take  different 
forms: housing mix programmes, (refugee) settle­
ment and dispersal policies, area-based urban pro­
grammes (Andersson et al. 2010). However, before 
engaging further in a debate concerning measures 
to avoid or mitigate segregation processes, the re­
search community needs to better analyse the dy­
namic  component  that  shapes  and  reproduces 
neighbourhood  population  compositions  and  the 
segregated city: migration. Without such process-
related knowledge – and of course more knowledge 
about whether ethnic segregation is harmful or not 
and for whom – policy interventions might be inef­
fective or even counter-productive. This article con­
tributes to the development of such process- related 
knowledge  while  leaving  the  consequence  issue 
aside.
 
It has been shown (Andersson and Bråmå 2004; 
Bråmå 2006; see also Wilson 1987; Jargovsky 1997; 
Bolt et al. 2008; Card et al. 2008) that selective mi­
gration,  that  is,  socioeconomic  and  ethnic  differ­
ences between those leaving, entering and staying 
in so-called deprived neighbourhoods, reproduces 
these neighbourhoods’ characteristics of being poor 
and immigrant dense. Key concepts launched to in­
form such studies and derived from the US discourse 
are “white flight” and “white avoidance” (see Ellen 

© The author 2013
Geografiska Annaler: Series B © 2013 Swedish Society for Anthropology and Geography

163

