Psychological Review
2004, Vol. 111, No. 4, 1036 –1060

Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association
0033-295X/04/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0033-295X.111.4.1036

An Integrated Theory of the Mind

John R. Anderson and Daniel Bothell

Carnegie Mellon University

Michael D. Byrne

Rice University

Scott Douglass, Christian Lebiere, and Yulin Qin

Carnegie Mellon University

Adaptive control of thought–rational (ACT–R; J. R. Anderson & C. Lebiere, 1998) has evolved into a
theory that consists of multiple modules but also explains how these modules are integrated to produce
coherent cognition. The perceptual-motor modules, the goal module, and the declarative memory module
are presented as examples of specialized systems in ACT–R. These modules are associated with distinct
cortical regions. These modules place chunks in buffers where they can be detected by a production
system that responds to patterns of information in the buffers. At any point in time, a single production
rule is selected to respond to the current pattern. Subsymbolic processes serve to guide the selection of
rules to fire as well as the internal operations of some modules. Much of learning involves tuning of these
subsymbolic processes. A number of simple and complex empirical examples are described to illustrate
how these modules function singly and in concert.

Psychology, like other sciences, has seen an inexorable move-
ment toward specialization. This is seen in the proliferation of
specialty journals in the field but also in the proliferation of
special-topic articles in this journal, which is supposed to serve as
the place where ideas from psychology meet. Specialization is a
necessary response to complexity in a field. Along with this move
to a specialization in topics studied, there has been a parallel move
toward viewing the mind as consisting of a set of specialized
components. With varying degrees of consensus and controversy,
there have been claims for separate mechanisms for processing
visual objects versus locations (Ungerleider & Miskin, 1982), for
procedural versus declarative knowledge (Squire, 1987), for lan-
guage (Fodor, 1983), for arithmetic (Dehaene, Spelke, Pinel, Sta-
nescu, & Tsivkin, 1999), for categorical knowledge (Warrington &
Shallice, 1984), and for cheater detection (Cosmides & Tooby,
2000), to name just a few.

Although there are good reasons for at least some of the pro-
posals for specialized cognitive modules, there is something un-
satisfactory about the result—an image of the mind as a discon-
nected set of mental specialties. One can ask “how is it all put back
together?” An analogy here can be made to the study of the body.
Modern biology and medicine have seen a successful movement
toward specialization, responding to the fact that various body

John R. Anderson, Daniel Bothell, Scott Douglass, and Yulin Qin,
Psychology Department, Carnegie Mellon University; Michael D. Byrne,
Psychology Department, Rice University; Christian Lebiere, Human Com-
puter Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.

This research was supported by National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
ministration Grant NCC2-1226 and Office of Naval Research Grant
N00014-96-01491.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to John R.
Anderson, Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, 352
Baker Hall, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. E-mail: ja@cmu.edu

1036

systems and parts are specialized for their functions. However,
because the whole body is readily visible, the people who study the
shoulder have a basic understanding how their specialty relates to
the specialty of those who study the hand, and the people who
study the lung have a basic understanding of how their specialty
relates to the specialty of those who study the heart. Can one say
the same of the person who studies categorization and the person
who studies online inference in sentence processing or of the
person who studies decision making and the person who studies
motor control?

Newell (1990) argued for cognitive architectures that would
explain how all the components of the mind worked to produce
coherent cognition. In his book, he described the Soar system,
which was his best hypothesis about the architecture. We have
been working on a cognitive architecture called adaptive control of
thought–rational (ACT–R; e.g., Anderson & Lebiere, 1998), which
is our best hypothesis about such an architecture. It has recently
undergone a major development into a version called ACT–R 5.0,
and this form offers some new insights into the integration of
cognition. The goal of this article is to describe how cognition is
integrated in the ACT–R theory. The quote below gives the es-
sence of Newell’s argument for an integrated system:

A single system (mind) produces all aspects of behavior. It is one
mind that minds them all. Even if the mind has parts, modules,
components, or whatever, they all mesh together to produce behavior.
Any bit of behavior has causal tendrils that extend back through large
parts of the total cognitive system before grounding in the environ-
mental situation of some earlier times. If a theory covers only one part
or component, it flirts with trouble from the start. It goes without
saying that there are dissociations, independencies, impenetrabilities,
and modularities. These all help to break the web of each bit of
behavior being shaped by an unlimited set of antecedents. So they are
important to understand and help to make that theory simple enough
to use. But they don’t remove the necessity of a theory that provides

