5

Emotions, Thoughts, and Feelings

Emotions as Engagements with the World

robert c. solomon

I have been arguing, for thirty years now, that emotions are a kind of

judgment—or rather, a complex of interlocking judgments, desires, and
intentions. Back in the seventies, it was an argument that attracted some
attention but little sympathy. What provoked me then—and still provokes
me now—is what I call the primitivist conception of emotions, the idea
that emotions are basically physiological or (now) neurological syndromes
conjoined with feelings that have only marginally to do with cognition or
our engagements in the world. William James’s well-known theory, or at
least that aspect of it he famously italicized, stated this view concisely: “Our
feeling of [bodily changes] as they occur IS the emotion.” An emotion might
be “triggered” by a disturbing perception, but its essence was physiology
plus feeling. Thus my own analysis of emotion challenged this primitivism
and maintained that emotions were, to employ a precocious word, intelli-
gent. This meant also challenging the sharp divide between emotions and
rationality, and I further insisted (inspired by Jean-Paul Sartre) that we
question the established notion that the emotions happen to us, render us
passive, and are essentially involuntary. Some aspects of this theory, notably
the idea that emotions are in some sense “cognitive” and consist (at least
in part) of evaluative judgments and thus display a kind of
intelligence
have become mainstream, even popular.1 Other aspects of the theory, my
voluntarist thesis in particular, continue to attract incredulousness.2 But it
is the “cognitivist” thesis that I would like to pursue here.

My bumper-sticker

slogan, my walk-away-from-the-lecture catch
phrase, has always been “Emotions are judgments.” The abbreviated slogan
has too often been mistaken for a full-blown theory in itself, as if the emo-
tions are nothing but judgments, and the particular term judgment has often

76

