02 Chapter 6.qxd  10/27/2008  1:54 PM  Page 77

SIX

social acceleration:
ethical and political consequences
of a desynchronized high-speed society

Hartmut Rosa

I. Social Acceleration in the Process of Modernization

In 1999, James Gleick, exploring everyday life in contemporary American
society, noted the “acceleration of just about everything”: love, life, speech,
politics, work, TV, leisure, etc.1 In this observation he certainly is not alone.
In popular as well as scientiWc discourse about the current evolution of West-
ern societies, acceleration Wgures as the single most striking and impor-
tant  feature.2 But  despite  the  noticeable  increase  in  the  discourse  about
acceleration and the shortage of time in recent years, the feeling that history,
culture, society, or even “time itself” in some strange way accelerates is not
new at all; it seems to be a constitutive trait of modernity as such. As his-
torians such as Reinhart Koselleck have persuasively argued, the general
sense of a speedup has accompanied modern society since at least the mid-
dle  of  the  eighteenth  century.3 And  indeed,  as  many  have  observed  and

1. James Gleick, Faster: The Acceleration of Just About Everything (New York: Pantheon Books,

1999).

2. William E. Scheuerman, “Liberal Democracy and the Empire of Speed,” Polity 34, no.
1 (2001): 41: “Any attempt to make sense of the human condition at the start of the new cen-
tury must begin with an analysis of time and space compression.” “Time-and-space compres-
sion” is David Harvey’s term for acceleration; see The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry
into the Origins of Cultural Change (Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell, 1989).

3. Cf. Reinhart Koselleck, Futures Past: On the Semantics of Historical Time (Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1985). Koselleck demonstrates that complaints about the overwhelming
speed of modern history start well before the French Revolution and long before there is a
noticeable development of technological speed. The discourse on acceleration then periodically
peaks again and again during the following centuries. For example, in 1877 W. G. Greg observed

