J. Math. Biol. 43, 221–246 (2001)
Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI):
10.1007/s002850000078

F. Berezovskaya · G. Karev · R. Arditi

Mathematical Biology

Parametric analysis of the ratio-dependent
predator–prey model

Received: 24 December 1999 / Revised version: 27 October 2000 /
Published online: 21 August 2001 – c(cid:1) Springer-Verlag 2001

Abstract. We present a complete parametric analysis of stability properties and dynamic
regimes of an ODE model in which the functional response is a function of the ratio of
prey and predator abundances. We show the existence of eight qualitatively different types
of system behaviors realized for various parameter values. In particular, there exist areas of
coexistence (which may be steady or oscillating), areas in which both populations become
extinct, and areas of “conditional coexistence” depending on the initial values. One of the
main mathematical features of ratio-dependent models, distinguishing this class from other
predator–prey models, is that the Origin is a complicated equilibrium point, whose charac-
teristics crucially determine the main properties of the model. This is the ﬁrst demonstration
of this phenomenon in an ecological model. The model is investigated with methods of the
qualitative theory of ODEs and the theory of bifurcations. The biological relevance of the
mathematical results is discussed both regarding conservation issues (for which coexistence
is desired) and biological control (for which extinction is desired).

1. Introduction

The construction and study of models for the population dynamics of predator–prey
systems have remained an important area in theoretical ecology since the famous
Lotka-Volterra equations. These authors set a framework which is still followed
today: a system of two differential equations, with a simple correspondence (usually
proportionality) between prey consumption and predator production. A most crucial
element in these models is the “functional response” or “trophic function”, the
function that describes the number of prey consumed per predator per unit time for
given quantities of prey N and predators P .

Much early work was only concerned with the way in which this function varies
with prey density (e.g., the so-called Holling types I, II, III), ignoring the effect of
predator density. Even today, most simulation models developed for applications

F. Berezovskaya, G. Karev: Center for Problems of Forest Ecology and Productivity,
Russian Academy of Sciences, 62 Novocheremushkinskaya str., Moscow 117418, Russia.
e-mail: fsberezo@hotmail.com; gkarev@hotmail.com. Current
address:
School of Mathematics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
R. Arditi (author for correspondence): Institut National Agronomique Paris-Grignon,
Ecologie des Populations et Communaut´es, 16 rue Claude Bernard, 75231 Paris
Cedex 05, France. e-mail: arditi@inapg.inra.fr

Key words or phrases: Dynamical system – Phase portrait – Bifurcation – Complicated
singular point – Population dynamics – Biological control

