E
C
N
E
I
C
S
O
R
U
E
N

Processing of hierarchical syntactic structure in music

Stefan Koelscha,1, Martin Rohrmeiera,b, Renzo Torrecusoa,c, and Sebastian Jentschkea

aCluster: Languages of Emotion, Freie Universität, 14195 Berlin, Germany; bMIT Intelligence Initiative, Department of Linguistics and Philosophy,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; and cBrain Institute, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, 59056-450, Natal, Brazil

Edited* by Dale Purves, Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, and approved July 30, 2013 (received for
review January 8, 2013)

information on different

Hierarchical structure with nested nonlocal dependencies is a key
feature of human language and can be identiﬁed theoretically in
most pieces of tonal music. However, previous studies have argued
against the perception of such structures in music. Here, we show
processing of nonlocal dependencies in music. We presented
chorales by J. S. Bach and modiﬁed versions in which the hierarchical
structure was rendered irregular whereas the local structure was
kept intact. Brain electric responses differed between regular and
irregular hierarchical structures, in both musicians and nonmusi-
cians. This ﬁnding indicates that, when listening to music, humans
apply cognitive processes that are capable of dealing with long-
distance dependencies resulting from hierarchically organized syn-
tactic structures. Our results reveal that a brain mechanism funda-
mental for syntactic processing is engaged during the perception of
music, indicating that processing of hierarchical structure with
nested nonlocal dependencies is not just a key component of hu-
man language, but a multidomain capacity of human cognition.
syntax | context-free grammar | parsing | electroencephalography | EEG
To process sequential information featuring both local and

nonlocal dependencies between elements, nervous systems
need to represent
time scales, as
reﬂected in different frequencies of oscillatory processes (1, 2)
and different types of memory (3, 4). Tonal music has evolved to
an extent that composers could make the fullest use of such
representations. On the one hand, tonal music involves repre-
sentations of single events and local relationships on short time
scales. On the other hand, many composers designed nested hi-
erarchical syntactic structures spanning longer time scales, poten-
tially up to entire movements of symphonies and sonatas (5, 6).
Hierarchical syntactic structure (involving the potential for nested
nonlocal dependencies) is a key component of the human lan-
guage capacity (7–11) and is frequently produced and perceived
in everyday life. For example, in the sentence “the boy who helped
Peter kissed Mary,” the subject relative clause ”who helped Peter”
is nested into the main clause ”the boy kissed Mary,” creating a
nonlocal hierarchical dependency between ”the boy” and ”kissed
Mary.” Music theorists have described analogous hierarchical
structures for music. Schenker (5) was the ﬁrst to describe musical
structures as organized hierarchically, in a way that musical events
are elaborated (or prolonged) by other events in a recursive
fashion. According to this principle, e.g., a phrase (or set of phrases)
can be conceived of as an elaboration of a basic underlying tonic–
dominant–tonic progression. Schenker further argued that this
principle can be expanded to even larger musical sequences, up
to entire musical movements. In addition, Hofstadter (12) was
one of the ﬁrst to argue that a change of key embedded in a
superordinate key (such as a tonal modulation away from, and
returning to, an initial key) constitutes a prime example of re-
cursion in music. Based on similar ideas, several theorists have
developed formal descriptions of the analysis of hierarchical
structures in music (13–15). One of these approaches, the Gener-
ative Theory of Tonal Music (GTTM) by Lerdahl and Jackendoff
(13), has become one of the most inﬂuential current theories
in music theory and music psychology. Another approach is
the Generative Syntax Model (GSM), which provides explicit
generative rules modeled in analogy with linguistic syntax (15).

However, it has remained unknown whether hierarchical musi-
cal structure is perceived by human listeners, or whether hier-
archical musical structure is merely a historical convention driven
by factors such as notation (where relationships between keys
can be surveyed and constructed on paper). The perception
of hierarchical structure of music would indicate that this
structural property reﬂects, and is driven by, our capacity to
perceive and produce hierarchical, potentially recursive struc-
tures (7, 8, 16).

More critically, the theoretical accounts on hierarchical struc-
tures in music have been challenged by scholars who argued that
the traditional theory of harmony is local and that syntax of tonal
music can be captured, e.g., by Markov models (17, 18). Likewise,
it has been argued that musical understanding does not centrally
involve grasp of large-scale musical dependencies (19). This view
assumes that hierarchical accounts are not reﬂected in the cog-
nitive processing of musical structure and that local models yield
the best account of elementary tonal harmony (18).

Empirical evidence on this topic is sparse, but, if anything,
then empirical data rather support local accounts, showing that
even musically trained listeners are perceptually surprisingly in-
sensitive to drastic manipulations of large-scale musical structure
(20), including scrambling the order of the phrases within a sin-
gle piece (21) or rewriting sections of large tonal pieces so that
they end in keys that do not provide tonal closure (22). Notably,
all previous studies reporting behavioral or neurophysiological
effects of music–syntactic manipulations have tapped into pro-
cessing of local dependencies, either with frank local violations
(such as chords with out-of-key tones or harmonic sequences not
ending with an authentic cadence) (23–25), or by manipulating
the local transition probability of occurrence of syntactically legal
events (26). This was the case even in those studies that used tree
models to describe music–syntactic irregularities (27, 28). Thus,
behavioral and neurophysiological effects reported in previous
studies on music–syntactic processing could have been driven
only by the processing of local dependencies (21, 28). Other
studies showed recognition of harmonic and melodic reductions,
which are predicted by syntactic theories of music like the
GTTM or GSM (29, 30) or correlations between hierarchical
structure and ratings of tension and relaxation (31), but those
studies did not provide evidence for processing of long-distance
dependencies (which are also predicted by GTTM and GSM).
Thus, although hierarchical musical structures can be described
theoretically, there is a striking absence of evidence for the
processing of hierarchical syntactic structures involving long-
distance dependencies in music.

To investigate this issue, we used two original chorales by J. S.
Bach (BWV 302 and 373, Fig. 1, Fig. S1, and Audio File S1),
both with a long-distance dependency of the basic form ABA. In
addition, we used modiﬁed versions of the form A′BA in which

Author contributions: S.K. and M.R. designed research; R.T. performed research; S.K.
contributed new reagents/analytic tools; S.J. analyzed data; and S.K., M.R., and S.J. wrote
the paper.

The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

*This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: stefan.koelsch@fu-berlin.de.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1300272110/-/DCSupplemental.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1300272110

PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 6

