GENERAL COMMENTARY
published: 28 July 2014
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00750

Is there an inverted-U relationship between creativity and
psychopathology?
Anna Abraham*

Department of Community Medicine and Behavioural Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Jabriya, Kuwait
*Correspondence: annaabr@gmail.com

Edited by:
Antoine Bechara, University of Southern California, USA
Reviewed by:
Rex Eugene Jung, University of New Mexico, USA
Dean Keith Simonton, University of California, Davis, USA

Keywords: top down control, information processing, creative cognition, mental illness, divergent thinking, psychopathology, creativity, inverted-U
function

A commentary on the Research Topic

Madness and Creativity: Yes, No or
Maybe?
Edited by Anna Abraham

Few issues polarize the scientiﬁc commu-
nity within the ﬁeld of creativity as the
purported association between creativity
and psychopathology. The idea that the
two are intimately linked dates back to
Greek antiquity where the mental state of
creative individuals during idea generation
was noted to be highly aberrant. However,
such eccentric states were not held to
reﬂect clinical levels of mental illness until
the 1800s (Becker, 2001).

The intuitive appeal of this connection
partly stems from the commonalities we
associate with mental illness and creativ-
ity, including a high tolerance for ambi-
guity, the ability to generate non-generic
conceptual connections, and the adop-
tion of alternative perspectives (Abraham,
in press). Moreover, higher than aver-
age incidences of mental illness are found
among people who practice professions
that demand high levels of creativity,
such as visual artists and writers (Kyaga
et al., 2011; Simonton, 2014). The infor-
mation processing mechanism that is gen-
erally proposed as underlying the link
between creativity and psychopathology is
that shortcomings during normative cog-
nition (e.g., cognitive disinhibition), that
are characteristic of certain psychiatric
populations (e.g., psychosis), may trans-
late to beneﬁts in the context of creative
cognition (Carson, 2011).

There are, however, also good grounds
to be skeptical of the “mad genius” meme,
which some argue is a quixotic notion at
best (Schlesinger, 2009). For one thing,
many of the studies that have been used
to support this idea have come under a
lot of criticism on methodological counts
(Thys et al., 2014). Some have even shown
that the presence of psychopathological
traits explains only a paltry amount of the
variance in creative performance (Silvia
and Kimbrel, 2010). In addition, notwith-
standing notable exceptions (e.g., van
Gogh), individuals who achieved creative
eminence in their ﬁelds were not oper-
ating at peak levels of productivity when
they reached the point of severe mental
illness.

So how can we make sense of this
picture given that
the evidence of a
positive relationship between creativity
and mental illness is clearly mixed? One
approach would be to breakdown the
empirical investigations that have assessed
this link into meaningful categories based
on a speciﬁc criterion and to evaluate
whether any systematic patterns emerge as
a result.

The madness-creativity link has, for
instance, been investigated by assessing
the performance of both psychiatric pop-
ulations as well as subclinical popula-
tions on measures of creativity (Kaufman,
2014). The most well studied psychiatric
populations in this regard include indi-
viduals with schizophrenia, bipolar disor-
der, attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) and autism. Subclinical popula-
tions have also been widely assessed, and

these refer to high risk healthy popula-
tions who are deﬁned as such because they
exhibit a high degree of mental illness-
relevant personality traits. The rationale
behind investigating subclinical groups is
that studying high-functioning individu-
als who show some degree of predispo-
sition for a clinical disorder enables us
to understand the workings of the infor-
mation processing biases related to that
disorder without the burden of having
to control for variables that can exert a
confounding effect in studies on clini-
cal populations (e.g., medication). Indeed,
much evidence points to similarities in
the information processing biases (e.g.,
latent disinhibition) typical of speciﬁc
clinical groups (e.g., schizophrenia) and
their respective subclinical populations
(e.g., high psychoticism or schizotypal
groups).

One means by which the creativity-
psychopathology link can be investigated
then is to focus on investigations of pop-
ulations that are documented to have
similar information processing biases and
to cluster these studies by the type of
population (clinical/subclinical) and the
severity of disorder (high/low dysfunc-
tion). Let’s take the premise that reduced
top-down down control (inﬂuence of
knowledge and expectations) on infor-
mation processing can have a facilitative
or debilitative effect on creative cogni-
tion. A number of psychiatric popula-
tions, such as ADHD and schizophrenia,
are associated with poor top-down con-
trol and corresponding fronto-striatal dys-
function (Bradshaw and Sheppard, 2000),

www.frontiersin.org

July 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 750 | 1

