 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
Guidelines for Gender Sensitive Research 
Prepared by Brigitte Leduc  
 
November 2009 

 

What is a gender sensitive research? 
Gender sensitive research is not research on women or on 
gender relationships; it is research that takes into account 
gender  as  a  significant  variable  in  environmental  and 
development  studies.  Men  and  women  have  different 
roles,  which  impact  differently  on  the  environment  and 
development. Moreover, the power relations between men 
and women can greatly influence the perspective of men 
and women on environmental and development problems. 
Thus,  gender  sensitive  research  pays  attention  to  the 
similarities and the differences between men and women’s 
experiences  and  viewpoints,  and  gives  equal  value  to 
each. 

What is the problem with traditional research? 
Remembering  that  women  constitute  the  other  half  of  the 
population is important. Overlooking women’s experiences 
and points of view leads to the wrong conclusions, or at 
least an incomplete picture of the problem. 
In  the  Hindu  Kush-Himalayan  region,  research  on  the 
environment and development seldom considers gender as 
a  significant  variable.  Environmental  research  often  pays 
little  attention  to  the  human  and  social  dimensions.  The 
impact of the population on the environment is examined 
in  relation  to  ‘population  activities’,  but  rarely  taking  into 
account the gender dimension: ‘population’ is treated as a 
homogenous  group.  Poverty  assessment  also  bases  its 
analysis  on  household  incomes  and  expenditures;  the 
differential  experiences  of  poverty  among  household 
members  is  rarely  analysed.  Moreover,  only  productive 
paid work is taken into account and valued in economic 
analysis,  while  household  and  unpaid  work  –  mainly 
performed by women – is overlooked, even if it makes up 
a  large  part  of  food  security.  Therefore,  in  traditional 
research,  women’s  experiences  and  contributions  remain 
invisible, and, consequently, important aspects of an issue 
remain undocumented and underestimated and, therefore, 
may be misunderstood. 
Gender  has  only  recently  been  considered  a  significant 
variable in research. However, although it is starting to be 
recognised in social sciences, it is seldom acknowledged 
and applied in natural sciences or economics. The choice 
of 
and 
methodology, analysis  framework,  and  language  used in 
scientific  articles  tends  to  reflect  male  biases  and 
patriarchal values.  

conceptual 

framework 

research 

topic, 

Scientists often argue that they do distinguish between men 
and  women  and,  thus,  do  not  discriminate  and  are 
objective. Women researching on women’s issues are still 
often  accused  of  subjectivity,  while  men  who  overlook 
women’s perspectives and generalise their findings to the 
overall  population  related  to  their  issue  are  considered 
objective. 

What are the benefits of engendering 
research? 

into 

improve 

research  can 

A better understanding of the problem 
Engendering  research  does  not  change  the  scope  of  the 
research;  it  provides  new  perspectives,  raises  new 
questions,  and  uses  new  analysis  tools  to  create  a  more 
complete picture of the problem. As men and women have 
different roles and different power, their perspectives on a 
problem can be quite different. By combining their different 
experiences and viewpoints, researchers can enhance the 
comprehension  of  a  problem.  Therefore,  integrating  a 
gender  perspective 
its 
relevance, coverage, and quality (ADEA Working Group 
on Higher Education 2006, p. 4). For example, research 
to  identify  the  impacts  of  global  climate  change  in  the 
Hindu  Kush-Himalayas  would  be  more  precise  if  it 
integrates in its analysis framework the impacts on human 
activities, livelihoods, and vulnerability to natural hazards. 
As  men  and  women  have  different  roles,  and  as  their 
respective  social  status  and  the  power  relations  could 
impact on their capacity to adapt to climate change, the 
gender  dimension  is  quite  relevant  and  will  enhance  the 
results  of  the  research  and  increase  its  usefulness  to 
policymakers.  
A  study  on  the  value  chain  of  medicinal  plants  that 
includes a gender perspective would contribute not only to 
identifying who is doing what and what needs to be done 
to increase the producers’ benefits, it could also contribute 
to  identifying  measures  to  ensure  equitable  benefits  for 
producers  and  processors  for  both  men  and  women, 
increasing its impact to reduce poverty. 

Methodologies that empower 
A  gender  sensitive  research  methodology  is  usually  more 
participatory  and  can  contribute  greatly  to  empowering 
people,  notably  women.  It  helps  both  men  and  women 
concerned by a problem to analyse an issue, understand 
its causes, and find solutions. 

( 1 ) 

