R E P O R T S

Sparse Coding and

Decorrelation in Primary Visual
Cortex During Natural Vision

William E. Vinje1,2 and Jack L. Gallant1,3*

Theoretical studies suggest that primary visual cortex (area V1) uses a sparse
code to efﬁciently represent natural scenes. This issue was investigated by
recording from V1 neurons in awake behaving macaques during both free
viewing of natural scenes and conditions simulating natural vision. Stimulation
of the nonclassical receptive ﬁeld increases the selectivity and sparseness of
individual V1 neurons, increases the sparseness of the population response
distribution, and strongly decorrelates the responses of neuron pairs. These
effects are due to both excitatory and suppressive modulation of the classical
receptive ﬁeld by the nonclassical receptive ﬁeld and do not depend critically
on the spatiotemporal structure of the stimuli. During natural vision, the
classical and nonclassical receptive ﬁelds function together to form a sparse
representation of the visual world. This sparse code may be computationally
efﬁcient for both early vision and higher visual processing.

Although area V1 has been studied for over
40 years, little is known about how V1 en-
codes complex natural scenes. Theoretical stud-
ies suggest that natural scenes can be efficient-
ly represented by a sparse code based on
filters that resemble neurons found in area V1
(1, 2). Sparse codes lie along a continuum
ranging from dense codes, where neurons
respond to most stimuli, to local codes, where
neurons give extremely selective responses
(3). Both of these extremes are inefficient in
several important respects. Dense codes are
highly redundant and each neural response
carries little information, whereas local codes
require an implausibly large number of neu-
rons and are computationally intractable. In
contrast, neurons that are tuned to match the
sparsely distributed, informative components
of the natural world can produce sparse codes.
Sparse codes transmit information with min-
imal redundancy and relatively few spikes.
Consequently, they are both informationally
and metabolically more efficient than dense
codes (4). There have been a few studies of
sparse coding in inferior temporal visual ar-
eas (5). We have addressed this issue in area
V1.

Recent

theoretical studies suggest

that
nonlinear interactions between neurons may
increase coding sparseness in area V1 (2, 6).
These interactions are predominantly reflect-
ed in modulation of classical receptive field
(CRF) responses by the surrounding nonclas-
sical receptive field (nCRF) (7). Previous ex-

1Program in Neuroscience, 2Department of Molecular
and Cellular Biology, and 3Department of Psychology,
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720 –1650, USA.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-
mail: gallant@socrates.berkeley.edu

periments have demonstrated that nCRF stim-
ulation strongly modulates responses during
free viewing of natural scenes (8). This report
demonstrates that V1 employs a sparse code
to represent natural scenes and shows that the
nCRF plays a crucial role in this process.

We have addressed this issue by using
controlled stimuli that simulate natural vi-
sion. The stimuli were sequences of images
simulating the spatial and temporal patterns
occurring in and around the CRF when an
animal freely views a static natural scene (see
Fig. 1A). Eye scan paths were generated with
a statistical model of eye movements made
during free viewing (9). Image patches were
extracted from a natural scene along the sim-
ulated scan path and converted to gray scale
(10). Each natural vision movie was com-
posed of a series of simulated fixations sep-
arated by brief simulated saccadic transitions.
In the experiments described here, we ma-
nipulated the size of the extracted image
patches. Patch size varied from one to four
times the diameter of the CRF. To reduce
potential boundary artifacts, the outer 10% of
each image patch was blended smoothly into
the neutral gray background. Data reported
here are from 61 well-isolated neurons re-
corded in area V1 of two awake behaving
primates (11).

The sparseness of V1 responses increases
dramatically with larger natural image patch-
es that encompass both the CRF and the
nCRF. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 1,
which compares responses obtained with
stimuli confined to the CRF (Fig. 1B) with
those obtained with stimuli four times the
diameter of the CRF (Fig. 1C). To quantify
sparseness we used a nonparametric statistic
(12): S ⫽ {1 ⫺ [(⌺ri/n)2/⌺(ri
2/n)]}/[1 ⫺ (1/n)],
where ri is the response to the ith frame of a

movie (averaged across trials) and n is the
number of movie frames. Values of S near
0% indicate a dense code, and values near
100% indicate a sparse code.

Distributions of S across the sample of
neurons are shown in Fig. 2 for each stimulus
size. As stimulus size increases, sparseness
increases systematically (P ⬍ 0.01) (13). The
sparseness statistic saturates when stimuli are
three to four times the size of the CRF,
consistent with the spatial extent of V1 nCRF
modulation reported in other studies (7). The
high sparseness values produced by large
stimuli suggest that area V1 uses a sparse
code during natural vision, when stimuli span
the entire visual field.

The simulated saccades in our natural vi-
sion movies often produce large transient re-
sponses followed by rapid adaptation during
the course of the fixation. To assess the con-
tribution of this fine temporal structure to
sparseness, we recomputed the sparseness
statistic after averaging all responses within
each fixation. Absolute sparseness values are
significantly lower in the fixation-based anal-
ysis (P ⬍ 0.05), but sparseness still increases
with increasing nCRF stimulation (14). Thus,
transient responses and adaptation contribute
to sparseness but do not account for all of the
observed nCRF effects.

We reanalyzed a subset of cells to deter-
mine whether these sparsening effects were
due to nCRF suppression, excitation, or both
(n ⫽ 36 cells; stimuli four times the CRF
diameter). Twenty-nine percent of all
the
frames in this sample are significantly mod-
ulated (P ⬍ 0.05), and the ratio of suppres-
sion to excitation is about 4.5 to 1. Excitation
is often concentrated in the onset transients
that occur after simulated saccades, whereas
suppression reduces responses across an en-
tire fixation. Thus, natural nCRF stimulation
appears to increase sparseness by both en-
hancing and suppressing specific epochs of
the response.

It

is unlikely that

these results are an
artifact of incorrect CRF definition (15). We
defined the CRF as the circular region cir-
cumscribing all locations where stimuli evoked
action potentials. Overestimation of CRF siz-
es would cause inadvertent nCRF stimulation
by movies confined to the nominal CRF,
thereby increasing estimates of CRF sparse-
ness and decreasing the apparent sparsening
effects of nCRF stimulation.

We also performed a control experiment
to ensure that our sparseness estimates did
not depend on the position of the patch
boundary, which necessarily varied with patch
size. The control stimulus consisted of a nat-
ural vision movie four times the CRF diam-
eter on which a sharp, white ring was super-
imposed along the exterior boundary of the
defined CRF. The ring provided a strong
artificial edge to enhance the magnitude of

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 287 18 FEBRUARY 2000

1273

