A R T I C L E S

Divergence of fMRI and neural signals in V1 during
perceptual suppression in the awake monkey

Alexander Maier1, Melanie Wilke1, Christopher Aura1, Charles Zhu2, Frank Q Ye2 & David A Leopold1,2

The role of primary visual cortex (V1) in determining the contents of perception is controversial. Human functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies of perceptual suppression have revealed a robust drop in V1 activity when a stimulus is
subjectively invisible. In contrast, monkey single-unit recordings have failed to demonstrate such perception-locked changes in
V1. To investigate the basis of this discrepancy, we measured both the blood oxygen level–dependent (BOLD) response and
several electrophysiological signals in two behaving monkeys. We found that all signals were in good agreement during
conventional stimulus presentation, showing strong visual modulation to presentation and removal of a stimulus. During
perceptual suppression, however, only the BOLD response and the low-frequency local ﬁeld potential (LFP) power showed
decreases, whereas the spiking and high-frequency LFP power were unaffected. These results demonstrate that the coupling
between the BOLD and electrophysiological signals in V1 is context dependent, with a marked dissociation occurring during
perceptual suppression.

Perceptual suppression provides an intriguing puzzle for sensory
neuroscientists: how is an unperceived stimulus represented in the
brain? Binocular rivalry and related phenomena, in which salient visual
patterns are rendered temporarily invisible to the observer, have been
frequently employed to dissociate sensation from perception while
monitoring brain activity1. These studies have provided insight into
the nature of visual suppression, but have nonetheless failed to answer
the fundamental question of what role V1 activity has in determining
the visibility of a stimulus2. The main problem is that human and
animal studies have reached nearly opposite conclusions. On the one
hand, measurements of the BOLD signal
in human fMRI have
commonly found partial or even complete elimination of V1 responses
to perceptually suppressed stimuli during rivalry3–9, which suggests that
V1 is important in determining whether a stimulus reaches subsequent
processing stages. On the other hand, monkey single-unit studies found
little or no change in activity in this area as a function of perceptual
state, leading to the conclusion that perceptual suppression does not
involve the perturbation of visual signals in the ﬁrst cortical processing
stage10–13. This discrepancy has been identiﬁed as a major impediment
for understanding how V1 activity contributes to perception.

Until now, it has been impossible to isolate the potential reasons for
the observed differences, as fMRI and electrophysiological studies
have differed in their visual stimuli, behavioral procedures and
species tested3,14,15. Here, we directly investigated the basis of these
contradictory ﬁndings and further explored the role of V1 in
visual perception by measuring both fMRI and electrophysiological
responses of two trained monkeys experiencing perceptual suppression.
Holding the stimulus procedure constant, we found that fMRI and

neurophysiological signals in V1, although in good agreement during
conventional stimulation, consistently diverged during perceptual
suppression, with the most accurate reﬂection of stimulus visibility
provided by BOLD responses.

RESULTS
The main objective of the study was to compare neural and fMRI
responses under identical stimulus and perceptual conditions. To this
end, we trained both monkeys to respond explicitly to the visibility of a
salient target that was presented on a screen by depressing a lever when-
ever the target was present. We used generalized ﬂash suppression
(GFS)16, where a salient target disappears on the abrupt onset of a
surrounding ﬁeld of dynamic dots, to reliably induce perceptual
suppression (the stimulus sequence used in the present study is
shown in Fig. 1a). Previous work in monkeys13 and humans16
demonstrated that such a stimulus reliably leads to all-or-none percep-
tual suppression in the absence of either local or interocular conﬂict. By
adjusting stimulus parameters, such as the density of the dots, the
minimum distance between the dots and the target, and the ocular
conﬁguration, we were able to affect the probability of the all-or-none
target disappearance (see Methods). Suppression in the GFS procedure
is related to that in motion-induced blindness17, but is controlled using
a temporal sequence resembling binocular rivalry ﬂash suppression18.
As with conventional binocular rivalry, GFS suppression is known to
diminish the visual responses of extrastriate cortical neurons, but has
little effect on V1 ﬁring rates10,11,19,20.

We used two general approaches to induce perceptual suppression.
In the ﬁrst, which we term perceptual report testing, we adjusted the

1Unit on Cognitive Neurophysiology and Imaging, Laboratory of Neuropsychology, National Institute of Mental Health and 2Neurophysiology Imaging Facility, National
Institute of Mental Health, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Eye Institute, US National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human
Services, 49 Convent Dr., B2J-45, MSC 4400, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. Correspondence should be addressed to A.M. (maiera@mail.nih.gov).

Received 27 March; accepted 24 June; published online 24 August 2008; doi:10.1038/nn.2173

NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 11 [ NUMBER 10 [ OCTOBER 2008

1 1 9 3

©2008 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience