MATLAB for Cognitive Science

Homework #3

Please upload your homework on Friday Nov 14h to Stud.IP. The sheet needs to contain your
name(s), matriculation number(s) as well as your MatLab code and all required labeled ﬁgures.
If you want a correction please say so on the sheet. If you encounter problems, don’t hesitate to
write an email to kahartma@uos.de and ameisener@uos.de. Be sure to include [matlab] in the
subject.

Task: Compute a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve

There is always activity in the visual cortex, even without visual stimulation.

We consider a single neuron and measure its ﬁring rate (spikes per second) under the condition
of being stimulated by a visual stimulus and under the second condition of showing no stimulus.
There should be 1000 trials for each condition.

• This time you will not get experimental data, but you will ’generate’ it yourself.

We can model the distribution of the ﬁring rates as 1000 samples coming from a gaussian
distribution, with a mean of 50 spikes/s and a variance of 15, for the “stimulus was not
presented”-condtion. When a visual stimulus is presented, the mean of the ﬁring rate distri-
bution increases by 10 spike per second (So you have to make two distributions: no stimulus
and with stimulus). You can ignore negative sample values, as ﬁring rate is always positive.
Remember: var != std!!!

– Generate two gaussian distributions: no stimulus (mean 50 spikes/s, var 15) and with

stimulus (mean 60 spikes/s, var 15). See normpdf

– Plot the histograms of the two distributions (hist or histc )

• Can we predict whether a stimulus was presented by only knowing the ﬁring rate?

We need a rule like “if the ﬁring rate is greater than a threshold of x spikes/sec → a stimulus
was presented.” But we have to keep in mind that the rule will not be perfect and there will
be false Positives and false Negatives.

• For looking at how different thresholds perform, we can let the threshold slide over the ﬁring
rate values. The performance of those thresholds can then be visualized by a ROC curve. A
ROC curve shows how much true and false Positives we will get for a certain threshold.
The more true Positives and less false Positives, the better the threshold classiﬁes the spiking
rates into the two conditions.

• For creating a ROC curve we simply let the threshold slide and compute the rate of true and
false positives for each threshold. The rates are computed simply by taking the normalized
area under the distributions right of the threshold. For false positives you take the area of the
distribution for no stimulus presented and for true positives you take the area of the stimulus

1

