 

 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

MEMO 

Brussels, 28 February 2013 

'Smart Borders': for an open and secure Europe 

Why do we need 'smart borders'? 
Travel flows at the external borders of the EU are increasing and are expected to increase 
even more in the future. Border crossings at the air borders alone could increase by 80%, 
from  400  million  in  2009  to  720  million  in  2030.  This  will  result  in  longer  delays  and 
queues for travellers if border checking procedures are not modernised in time. Member 
States cannot address this only by hiring additional border guards and expanding border 
crossing points. The 'Smart Borders' package leads the way towards a next generation of 
border checks relying on new, much more effective technologies. 
The Entry/Exit System  (EES) and the Registered Travellers Programme (RTP) will speed 
up border check procedures for third country nationals entering the EU while at the same 
time enhancing security. 
Meeting  these  two  objectives  of  facilitating  access  and  enhancing  security  would  make 
sure that the EU remains open to the world and attractive as a destination for non EU-
travellers.  

What are the current rules? 
Under the current rules, the Schengen Borders Code requires a thorough check at entry of 
all travellers crossing the external border; there is no flexibility in the system. The same 
checks are applied to all third country nationals, regardless of the level of risk associated 
with them or their frequency of travel.  
Moreover, there are currently no means to record a traveller’s cross-border movements. 
The period of time a traveller has stayed in the Schengen area is calculated based solely 
on the stamps affixed in the travel document. There is no European data base in which 
such  travellers  are  recorded.  As  a  result  there  is  no  effective  way  for  the  relevant 
authorities  to  address  the  issue  of  'overstayers'  (i.e.  travellers  who  stay  beyond  the 
authorised period of time). This lack of information affects the capacity of Member States 
to carry out returns and reduces the extent to which EU border and visa policy is based on 
evidence. 

Registered Traveller Programme 

How will an EU Registered Traveller Programme be working?  

The  Registered  Traveller  Programme  will  facilitate  border  crossings  for  frequent,  pre-
vetted and pre-screened third country travellers at the Schengen external borders.  

MEMO/13/141 

