Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 99e111

Consumers and new
food technologies

Fanny Rollin, Jean Kennedy and
Josephine Wills*
European Food Information Council (EUFIC),
Tassel House, Rue Paul-Emile Janson 6, 1000, Brussels,
Belgium (Tel.: D32 2 506 89 89; fax: D32 2 506 89 80;
e-mail: jo.wills@euﬁc.org)

This paper aims to describe the current landscape in Europe
within which emerging food technologies are developed and
applied, and to give insights from other parts of the world. Con-
sumers’ attitudes towards emerging food technologies are de-
scribed, with a focus on ﬁve case-studies; nanotechnology,
genetic modiﬁcation, nutrigenomics, food irradiation and animal
cloning. Stakeholders’ opinions speciﬁcally on nanotechnology
are also discussed taking into account a recent European consul-
tation. The factors that shape consumers’ views such as percep-
tions, knowledge and information, trust and socio-demographic
attributes that inﬂuence consumers’ views, are also included.

Introduction

The last two decades have seen considerable research
and development efforts dedicated to new food technolo-
gies. The “Flavr Savr” tomato (the ﬁrst genetically modi-
ﬁed (GM) food developed in 1994) and the birth of Dolly
the sheep (the ﬁrst mammal to be cloned from an adult so-
matic cell developed in 1996) are some of the well-known
examples that gave rise to much debate and controversy in
the media when they were ﬁrst developed. Nowadays, con-
sumers are exposed to several applications of emerging
technologies such as GM maize in Spain and irradiated
poultry meat in the Netherlands. However, even if a variety
of food ingredients and food contact materials derived from
new food technologies are already available in some Euro-
pean countries, the application is at an early stage and is
widely expected to grow.

One of the reasons for such interest in new food technol-
ogies is the anticipated range of beneﬁts they can bring to

* Corresponding author.
0924-2244/$ - see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2010.09.001

Review

the consumer and the food sector. The reported advantages
include safer, healthier more nutritious foods using less en-
ergy, water and chemicals and producing less waste. How-
ever,
likelihood of
exposure and risk to consumers from some new food tech-
nologies are largely unknown (Chaudhry et al., 2008).

the toxicological nature of hazard,

The ﬁrst part of this paper is concerned with consumers’
awareness and attitudes towards new food technologies in
general. Since consumers’ reactions to new food technolo-
gies are not a one-dimensional relationship, several aspects
of this relationship are also explored such as risk-beneﬁt
perceptions, knowledge and information, trust and socio-
demographic attributes. The second part will focus on
ﬁve case studies, namely nanotechnology, genetic modiﬁca-
tion, nutrigenomics, food irradiation and animal cloning.
There is a particular emphasis on nanotechnology, and
European stakeholders’ opinions from a recent open con-
sultation on nanotechnology are presented. This paper con-
cludes with a discussion about
the opportunity for
stakeholders and policy-makers to involve the public in
the new food technology debate and the potential for effec-
tive food risk/beneﬁt communication. This paper should be
considered as a general overview of the current research on
this topic and not as an exhaustive literature review.

Emerging food technologies

In Europe, the use of novel foods or novel food ingredi-
ents and their placing on the market within the Community
was ﬁrst deﬁned by the Regulation (EC) No 258/97. In this
legislation, novel foods or food ingredients are deﬁned as
foods or ingredients containing or produced from geneti-
cally modiﬁed organisms (GMOs); with a new or intention-
ally modiﬁed primary molecular structure; consisting of or
isolated from micro-organisms, fungi or algae, plants or an-
imals not obtained by traditional propagating or breeding
practices and having a history of safe food use; and foods
and food ingredients to which has been applied a production
process not currently used, where that process gives rise to
signiﬁcant changes in their composition or structure. A se-
ries of additional legislations completed the Regulation
(EC) No 258/97; among them Regulation (EC) No 1852/
2001 determines how certain information will be made ac-
cessible to the public. Since 2003, the authorisation and
marketing of GMOs or products derived from GMOs
doesn’t fall under the Regulation (EC) No 258/97 anymore,
but must be approved under Regulation EC No 1829/2003

