 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

Journal of Animal Ecology

 2008, 

77

, 145–155

doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2656.2007.01303.x

Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Combined effects of climate and biotic interactions on 
the elevational range of a phytophagous insect

Richard M. Merrill*§, David Gutiérrez†, Owen T. Lewis*, Javier Gutiérrez†, Sonia B. Díez† and 
Robert J. Wilson†‡

*
†
Department of  Zoology, University of  Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK; 
y Conservación, Escuela Superior de Ciencias Experimentales y Tecnología, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, 
‡
Tulipán s/n, Móstoles, E-28933 Madrid, Spain; and 
Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of  Exeter, 
Cornwall Campus, Penryn TR10 9EZ, UK

Área de Biodiversidad 

Summary

Aporia crataegi

A.  crataegi

A. crataegi

The ﬂight period of 

A. crataegi

We found that the current upper elevation limit to 

The mountains of the Sierra de Guadarrama (central Spain) include both cool and warm range
, which has disappeared from low

1.
The ranges of many species have expanded in cool regions but contracted at warm margins in
response to recent climate warming, but the mechanisms behind such changes remain unclear.
Particular debate concerns the roles of direct climatic limitation vs. the effects of interacting species
in explaining the location of low latitude or low elevation range margins.
2.
margins for the black-veined white butterﬂy, 
elevations since the 1970s without colonizing the highest elevations.
3.
’s distribution coincided
closely with that of  its host plants, but that the species was absent from elevations below 900 m,
even where host plants were present. The density of 
 per host plant increased with ele-
vation, but overall abundance of the species declined at high elevations where host plants were rare.
4.
 was later at higher elevations, meaning that butterﬂies in higher
populations ﬂew at hotter times of year; nevertheless, daytime temperatures for the month of peak
°
ﬂight decreased by 6·2 
C per 1 km increase in elevation.
5.
 eggs were laid on the south side of host plants (expected to
At higher elevations 
A. crataegi
correspond to hotter microclimates), whereas at lower sites the (cooler) north side of plants was
selected. Field transplant experiments showed that egg survival increased with elevation.
6.
A. cra-
, whereas the absence of host plants from high elevations sets the upper limit. This contrasts
taegi
with the frequent assumption that biotic interactions typically determine warm range margins, and
thermal limitation cool margins.
7.
Studies that have modelled distribution changes in response to climate change may have under-
estimated declines for many specialist species, because range contractions will be exacerbated by
mismatch between the future distribution of suitable climate space and the availability of resources
such as host plants.

Climatic limitation is the most likely explanation for the low elevation range margin of 

:
Key-words

altitude, biotic interactions, climate change, phenology, range shifts.

Introduction

Correspondence: Owen T. Lewis, Department of Zoology, 
University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK. 
Tel: + 44 0 1865 271162; Fax: + 44 0 1865 310447; 
E-mail: owen.lewis@zoo.ox.ac.uk
§Present address: Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge,
Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK.

The ranges of many species have expanded at high latitudes
and  elevations  but  contracted  at  their  warm  margins  in
response  to  recent  climate  change  (Walther 
.  2002;
Thomas, Franco & Hill 2006). Changes to the distribution of
‘habitable  climate  space’  may  lead  to  extinctions  if  future
ranges are too small or isolated from current ranges, and con-
sequently the impact of climate change on biodiversity is of
increasing  concern  (Thomas 
.  2004).  The  mechanisms

et al

et al

© 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2007 British Ecological Society

