DIRECTORS' "WIDER" RESPONSIBILITIES - PROBLEMS 

CONCEPTUAL, PRACTICAL AND PROCEDURAL? 

L. S .  SEALY* 

INTRODUCTION 

This is  a period  of  major change for company law.  The massive output 
of the legislators is ample testimony to this.  Less obviously,  but potentially 
every bit as far-reaching and fundamental, there are stirrings in the case-law 
too, as it slowly becomes apparent that the ancient rules and concepts which 
may have served their purpose well enough when the companies of the 1880s 
brought their disputes before the courts of the 1880s can no longer cope satis- 
factorily,  even with the same problems, a century further on. And of course, 
many of  the  problems  are new  too. 

We have been slow to recognise how different everything has become since 
that  formative  period  a  hundred  years  ago  when  Lord  Lindley  and  his 
brethren  laid  down  the  ground  rules  of  the  company  law  that  we  have 
inherited. The typical company has changed, but our perceived image of the 
notional  company that the law exists to serve has not.  The framework  of 
fundamentals on which  the more detailed rules  of company law are based 
has lost  some key  components; but we have been  slow to adjust.  Have we 
given proper thought to filling the vacuum left by the abolition of ultra vires, 
or to the adequacy of  the "maintenance  of  capital"  principle  to deal  with 
the ubiquitous two-dollar company? Judges (particularly in the wider world 
remote  from  London)  today  come  from  different  backgrounds  and bring 
different experiences to bear in their adjudication of corporate disputes. The 
language of nineteenth-centry  chancery is  imperfectly understood  by most 
lawyers and is inconsistently applied.  Concepts,  procedures,  remedies,  and 
above all,  fact-situations have not remained  static, and we must expect the 
law  to respond. 

I make this state of affairs my excuse to examine the law of directors' duties 
not simply as an analysis of the precedents  appears to show it  but,  rather 
more radically,  as I believe we ought to be beginning to see it.  In so far as 
writing de lege ferenda  allows one to ignore the more ew&mg3demands  of 
traditional  scholarship,  I  make apology in  advance. 

e  y.  .h- 

t Paper delivered at a plenary session of  the A.U.L.S.A.  conference, Monash  University,  25 
August  1987. 
* Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge University; Arthur Robinson and Heddenvicks' Visit- 
ing Professor  in Commercial  Law,  Melbourne  and  Monash  Universities,  1987. 

