Sun, E., Petetz, E., & Baer, U. (eds.) (2007).
The Claims of Literature: The Shoshana Reader.
New York: Fordham University Press.

Feminism
KATIE GARNER & REBECCA MUNFORD

the

Feminism describes
campaigns,
activities, and texts concerned with chal-
lenging and transforming how women are
treated and represented in society. It is a
political movement and discourse that
encompasses a diverse range of perspectives,
theories, and methods. As well as analyzing
patriarchal structures, feminist theory seeks
to propose new ways for women to bring
about social change. This drive underlies
much feminist activity, from public cam-
paigns for new political rights, to the search
for a new “feminine” writing. Current An-
glo-American models often conceptualize
the history of Western feminism in terms
of three movements, or “waves.” The ﬁrst
wave of activity dates from the end of the
eighteenth century through to the beginning
of collective female political action in the
form of the Suffragette and New Women’s
movements in Britain and the US, and the
granting of partial (1918) and full (1928)
franchise for women in Britain. The 1960s
signal the beginnings of the “second wave,”
when women collectively campaigned on a
broad range of issues including sexual health
and contraception, pornography, domestic
and gender discrimination in
abuse,
the workplace. This chapter of
feminist
theory is marked by the emergence of three
different models of feminist politics: liberal
feminism, which focuses on achieving
full equality and opportunities within
existing social structures; radical feminism,
which is revolutionary rather than refor-
mative in its conviction that creating
alternative, woman-centered institutions
and realities will bring
social
change; and socialist feminism, which sees

about

F E M I N I S M 595

“femaleness” and “femininity” as socially
and historically contingent, and is con-
cerned with the economic and cultural con-
texts of women’s oppression. Following the
decline of organized second-wave activities
in the 1980s, different accounts of feminism
from black and Third World women began
to readdress the First World bias of the ﬁrst
and second waves. These differing positions,
alongside developments in the ﬁelds of gen-
der studies, postcolonial theory, queer the-
ory, and postmodernism,
inform third-
wave feminism, which accordingly takes a
more global and plural view of the relation-
ship between power and subjectivity.

The history of feminism does not have a
deﬁnitive origin. As early as the beginning of
the ﬁfteenth century Christine de Pizan was
cataloguing the achievements of women and
challenging female stereotypes in The Book
of the City of Ladies (1983[1404–5]). How-
ever, Mary Wollstonecraft’s A Vindication of
the Rights of Woman (1992[1792]) is often
regarded as heralding the beginning of mod-
ern feminism in Britain. Written in the form
of a philosophical essay, Wollstonecraft’s
provocative call for reform foregrounded
the social, political, and economic margin-
alization of women at a time when the
question of the “rights of man” was being
debated in France and the US. Key to
Wollstonecraft’s argument was her belief
that social structures constructed female
inequality as “natural” and that women
do not choose to behave as they do, but
are instead enslaved by a society that forces
them to behave in certain “sentimental”
ways. In particular, Wollstonecraft identi-
ﬁed gallantry and sensibility as major social
fabrications which had been developed (by
men) to encourage women’s subordination.
The overarching problem,
she argued,
was women’s lack of access to education,
which held them in a “state of perpetual
childhood” (1992[1792]: 11). She proposed
that Enlightenment principles of rational

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

