681

Definitions

Although the word selfis probably spoken by nearly every(cid:173)
one every day, especially if one includes part-word usages
(e.g. yourself), it is quite difficult to define, Probably the
term is rooted in such widespread common experience and
basic linguistic, communicative needs that linguistic

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

THE SELF

ROY F. B A U M E I S T E R, Case Western Reserve University

INTRODUCTION

What is the self? In some ways, the thousands of journal
articles dealing with the self have seemed to make the an(cid:173)
swer to that fundamental question more elusive rather than
clearer. Even finding a way to sort and group that mass of
information is intimidating. This overview of the social
psychology of self begins with the proposition that there
are three important roots of selfhood. These are powerful,
prototypical patterns of experience in which people grasp
the basic meaning of self.

The first is the experience of reflexive consciousness,
that is, conscious attention turning back toward its own
source and gradually constructing a concept of oneself.
When you lie awake in bed late at night, thinking about
your failures and inadequacies, or glorying in your tri(cid:173)
umphs; when you look in the mirror or step on the scale or
read your resume; when after hearing about someone else's
heroic or heinous action, you pause to wonder whether you
are the sort of person who could ever do such a thing;
when you contemplate your future or your spiritual center
or your dwindling resources; or when you try to answer
some questions honestly about your opinions, traits, habits,
qualifications, and past experiences-these are the sort of
experiences that involve reflexive consciousness. Without
them, self would have no meaning or value and would
hardly exist at all. Self begins when awareness turns
around in a circle, so to speak,

I thank NIMH Grant 51482 for support, Steve Hastings and Brenda
Wilson for research assistance, and Todd Heatherton, Kristin Sommer,
Dianne Tice, and social seminar members for comments on a draft.

The second root is the Interpersonal

When someone looks into your
says your name, and you have a
or the same happens and you feel
join a group, or quit it; when you
celebrate an anniversary; when you
pression on someone or live up to
tions; when you discover that someone
you and you blush; when you keep
when you attend your Chil~,'~~s~:~;i?~~
humiliated and jealous upon
had romantic contact with
after defeating a major rival in an
or despair after losing same-c-tnese
ences reveal the interpersonal aspect of
most unthinkable outside a social
vital for making interpersonal ,e,aw,,'~
tions possible. Selves are handles
other people.

The third is the executive function,

troller, the origin. When you
when you drag yourself out of
morning; when you decide what it
to buy or work on or become; when
acting on an impulse, such as to
to hit someone, or to sleep with
you vote, or when you take out a
sist fatigue and temptation and
maximum effort, beyond the
experiences involve the executive
tive agent and decision-maker. Without
would be a mere helpless spectator
use or importance.

680

