REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 11 February 2014
doi: 10.3389/ﬁmmu.2014.00049

CTCF and ncRNA regulate the three-dimensional structure
of antigen receptor loci to facilitate V(D)J recombination

Nancy M. Choi and Ann J. Feeney *

Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA

Edited by:
Ananda L. Roy, Tufts University School
of Medicine, USA

Reviewed by:
Amy L. Kenter, University of Illinois
College of Medicine, USA
Kay L. Medina, Mayo Clinic, USA

*Correspondence:
Ann J. Feeney , Department of
Immunology and Microbial Science,
The Scripps Research Institute, 10550
North Torrey Pines Road, IMM-22, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA
e-mail: feeney@scripps.edu

At both the immunoglobulin heavy and kappa light chain loci, there are >100 functional
variable (V) genes spread over >2 Mb that must move into close proximity in 3D space
to the (D)J genes to create a diverse repertoire of antibodies. Similar events take place at
the T cell receptor (TCR) loci to create a wide repertoire of TCRs. In this review, we will
discuss the role of CTCF in forming rosette-like structures at the antigen receptor (AgR)
loci, and the varied roles it plays in alternately facilitating and repressing V(D)J rearrange-
ments. In addition, non-coding RNAs, also known as germline transcription, can shape
the 3D conﬁguration of the Igh locus, and presumably that of the other AgR loci. At the
Igh locus, this could occur by gathering the regions being transcribed in the VH locus into
the same transcription factory where Iµ is being transcribed. Since the Iµ promoter, Eµ,
is adjacent to the DJH rearrangement to which one V gene will ultimately rearrange, the
process of germline transcription itself, prominent in the distal half of the VH locus, may
play an important and direct role in locus compaction. Finally, we will discuss the impact
of the transcriptional and epigenetic landscape of the Igh locus on VH gene rearrangement
frequencies.

Keywords: V(D)J recombination, antigen receptor, chromatin, non-coding RNA, CTCF, histone modiﬁcation,
chromatin loop

INTRODUCTION
Antigen receptor (AgR) loci are facing a uniquely difﬁcult task to
produce a great diversity of receptors in order to recognize the
limitless possibility of antigens present in the environment of an
organism. With the advent of next generation sequencing, we can
now determine the actual diversity of AgRs by sequencing all of
the rearrangements from developing B and T cells. This diversity
is created through the combinatorial recombination of multiple
variable (V), diversity (D), and joining (J) gene segments at AgR
loci by the RAG1/2 recombinase complex, along with the extensive
junctional diversity at the V–D, D–J, and V–J junctions.

One of the most extensively studied AgR loci is the mouse Igh
locus where the VH, DH, and JH gene segments span a region of
~2.8 Mb (Figure 1). The 8–13 DH genes, the four JH genes, and
all of the constant region genes and enhancers are located within
a relatively small 300 kb region. In contrast, the 195 VH genes, of
which ~100 were deemed to be functional, are spread out over
~2.5 Mb. To create the greatest combinatorial diversity, all V genes
would have to be able to access the DH and JH genes relatively
equally regardless of their genomic distance. The question is then,
how is this equality achieved?

With growing appreciation for how three-dimensional struc-
tural changes at the locus may bring V genes into proximity of the
(D)J rearrangement to which one V gene will ultimately rearrange,
current studies are employing cutting edge technologies to fur-
ther understand this process. Chromatin conformation capture
(3C) and its more recent modiﬁcations, 4C, 5C, and Hi-C (1–3),
have allowed the identiﬁcation of long-range chromosomal inter-
actions, which facilitate the rearrangement of distant V genes by

making critical connections between the V genes and enhancers
downstream (4). Next generation sequencing technologies cou-
pled with chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) (ChIP-seq)
have allowed us to determine the binding sites of transcription
factors throughout the genome as well as the genome-wide epi-
genetic landscape. Deep sequencing of RNA reveals the entire
transcriptional proﬁle of cells for both coding and non-coding
RNA (ncRNA). Together, these techniques supply us with a bounty
of information regarding the transcriptional and epigenetic proﬁle
of AgR loci at varying stages of differentiation. In this review, we
will summarize and discuss how these recent studies have advanced
our understanding of how long-range chromatin interactions and
epigenetic changes may regulate V(D)J recombination at mouse
AgR loci.

AgR LOCI UNDERGO LARGE SCALE THREE-DIMENSIONAL
CONFORMATIONAL CHANGES DURING V(D)J
REARRANGEMENT
All B cell and T cell receptor (BCR, TCR) subunits are formed
through the process of V(D)J recombination. The BCR consists of
two immunoglobulin heavy chains (Igh) and two identical light
chains encoded by either the kappa (Igκ) or lambda (Igλ) loci. The
TCR alpha (Tcrα) and beta (Tcrβ), or delta (Tcrδ) and gamma
(Tcrγ) chains constitute the TCR complex of the two major T cell
subsets. The Igh and Igκ are of similarly large sizes of approxi-
mately 2.8 and 3.2 Mb, while the Tcrα/δ and Tcrβ loci are smaller
at 1.7 and 0.66 Mb. In comparison, the Igλ and Tcrγ loci are much
smaller, each only being about 200 kb. The challenge, which is
particularly great for the large receptor loci, is to give all V genes

www.frontiersin.org

February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 49 | 1

