R E V I E W S

Organization and segregation of 
bacterial chromosomes

Xindan Wang*, Paula Montero Llopis* and David Z. Rudner

Abstract | The bacterial chromosome must be compacted more than 1,000‑fold to fit into the 
compartment in which it resides. How it is condensed, organized and ultimately segregated 
has been a puzzle for over half a century. Recent advances in live‑cell imaging and 
genome‑scale analyses have led to new insights into these problems. We argue that the key 
feature of compaction is the orderly folding of DNA along adjacent segments and that this 
organization provides easy and efficient access for protein–DNA transactions and has a 
central role in driving segregation. Similar principles and common proteins are used in 
eukaryotes to condense and to resolve sister chromatids at metaphase.

DNA transactions
Processes in the cell that act 
on DNA: for example, 
transcription, replication, 
recombination and repair.

Plectonemic loops
Also known as interwound 
loops, these are loops of DNA 
that are twisted together as a 
result of under- or over-winding 
the DNA duplex.

Harvard Medical School, 
Department of Microbiology 
and Immunobiology,  
HIM 1025, 77 Avenue Louis 
Pasteur, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.
*These authors contributed 
equally to this work.
Correspondence to D.Z.R. 
e-mail:  
rudner@hms.harvard.edu
doi:10.1038/nrg3375
Published online  
12 February 2013

The visualization and characterization of the genetic 
material in bacteria has had a bumpy and controversial 
history. In eukaryotes, the orderly segregation of sister 
chromatids in mitosis was described in awe-inspiring 
detail in the 1880s1; by contrast, the bacterial chromo-
some, which tends to stain uniformly with basic dyes, 
was for many years believed to be unstructured. It was 
not until the 1930s that light microscopists using DNA 
dyes with acid-treated cells convincingly demonstrated 
that the bacterial chromosome was concentrated in 
discrete bodies with soft irregular outlines2,3 (FIG. 1A). 
These images changed the view of the bacterial chro-
mosome from a formless material to a defined structure 
that hinted at orderly and predictable behaviour4. These 
cloud-like nuclear bodies were named nucleoids.

Cryoelectron microscopy of vitreous sections of 
nucleoids revealed structures with features similar to 
those observed using DNA dyes (FIG. 1B) and showed 
irregular and dispersed morphologies that occupy about 
half of the intracellular space. Two striking features of 
these images were the presence of many coral-like projec-
tions that extended into the cytoplasm and the exclusion 
of the ribosomes from the nucleoid4. Similar compart-
mentalization has since been observed using fluores-
cence microscopy5 (FIG. 1C). These images still provoke 
our thinking about the bacterial chromosome. We envi-
sion a dynamic DNA surface that interacts with proteins 
in the cytoplasm. Although proteins can penetrate into 
and reside within the interior of the nucleoid, most DNA 
transactions are thought to occur at its periphery.

In the early 1970s, Pettijohn and colleagues6–9 devel-
oped methods to lyse Escherichia coli gently and to obtain 
nucleoids for direct electron microscopy visualization, 

providing an enduring image of the bacterial chromo-
some as a collection of plectonemic loops (that is, inter-
wound loops) emanating from a dense core (FIG. 1D) that 
is suggested to be organized by proteins and RNA6–8,10. 
The composition, organization and function (and even 
existence) of the core remain important and outstanding 
issues in the field. These studies led to the rosette model 
of the bacterial chromosome in which interwound loops 
are organized by a nucleoid scaffold (FIGS 1D,2a), creating 
a structure that resembles a bottlebrush. However, the 
molecular nature of this compact aggregate of DNA, its 
cellular localization and organization, and its local and 
global dynamics in living bacteria remained elusive.

Various technical advances (BOX 1) are providing 
new and exciting insights into bacterial chromosome 
organization and dynamics. These include fluorescence-
microscopy-based live-cell imaging to track multiple 
chromosomal loci in real time during cell division cycles, 
along with the development of genome-wide molecular 
and analytical approaches to study the conformations of 
chromosomes and the patterns of chromosome-associ-
ated proteins. In this Review, we draw on these recent 
studies to discuss our current understanding of two prob-
lems: how the chromosome is organized and compacted 
in the bacterial cell and how the replicated chromosomes 
are disentangled and segregated. We discuss these topics 
separately but, as you will see, they are intimately con-
nected. Our guiding premise is that the orderly folding 
of the chromosome, which occurs along adjacent DNA 
segments (called lengthwise condensation) in lockstep 
(that is, in synchrony) with its replication, generates its 
higher-order organization and functions as the driving 
force for bulk chromosome segregation. Throughout, 

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

 VOLUME 14 | MARCH 2013 | 191

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

