Cognitive Science 32 (2008) 685–712
Copyright C(cid:1) 2008 Cognitive Science Society, Inc. All rights reserved.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online
DOI: 10.1080/03640210802066865

Processing Polarity: How the Ungrammatical

Intrudes on the Grammatical

Shravan Vasishtha, Sven Br¨ussowb, Richard L. Lewisc, Heiner Drenhausa

aInstitute for Linguistics, University of Potsdam

bDepartment of Psychology, University of Heidelberg
cDepartment of Psychology, University of Michigan

Received 13 November 2006; received in revised form 14 July 2007; accepted 14 July 2007

Abstract

A central question in online human sentence comprehension is, “How are linguistic relations estab-
lished between different parts of a sentence?” Previous work has shown that this dependency resolution
process can be computationally expensive, but the underlying reasons for this are still unclear. This
article argues that dependency resolution is mediated by cue-based retrieval, constrained by indepen-
dently motivated working memory principles deﬁned in a cognitive architecture. To demonstrate this,
this article investigates an unusual instance of dependency resolution, the processing of negative and
positive polarity items, and conﬁrms a surprising prediction of the cue-based retrieval model: Partial-
cue matches—which constitute a kind of similarity-based interference—can give rise to the intrusion
of ungrammatical retrieval candidates, leading to both processing slow-downs and even errors of judg-
ment that take the form of illusions of grammaticality in patently ungrammatical structures. A notable
achievement is that good quantitative ﬁts are achieved without adjusting the key model parameters.

Keywords: Computational modeling; ACT–R; Eye tracking; Reading; Sentence processing

1. Introduction

The act of comprehending a sentence triggers a complex set of rapid cognitive processes
that engage multiple memory systems. Minimally, contact must be made with a long-term
lexical memory, novel compositional structures incrementally created and maintained in a
working memory, local and global ambiguities resolved at multiple levels of linguistic repre-
sentation, and an interpretation of the sentence constructed that is integrated into a referential
representation of the current discourse. A key process during all this is the integration of in-
coming lexical elements with the partial sentence-level structure built so far. Such integrations

Correspondence should be sent to Shravan Vasishth, Institute for Linguistics, University of Potsdam, Postfach

601553, D–14415, Potsdam, Germany. E-mail: vasishth@acm.org

