 
 
 
 
  

  
Questions: 

APPENDIX 

Migrant Organizations 

1.  Read the example of the Association of the Yazidis. What is your first impression on the 

work of the association? How is their offer composed? Who does it address?  

2.  How  is  the  organisation  incorporated  into  the  social  structure  of  the  city?  How  is  it 
interconnected  with  other  actors,  organisations?  Is  the  association  supported  or 
promoted through any means by other actors? 

3.  Can the Forum be seen as an important agent in negotiating the production of the city ? 

In which way? How does the Forum contribute to it? 

 
 
The Association of the Yazidi  ( Forum ) – Oldenburg 
  
The Association of the Yazidi in Oldenburg was founded in 1993. Its aim is to maintain and to 
transmit  religious  and  cultural  habits  as  well  as  values  and  traditions  of  the  Yazidi  form  of 
society  (social  system)  among  the  diaspora.  The  character  of  the  Yazidi  lifestyle,  in  both 
ideological  and  traditional  way/sense,  is  to  be  maintained  considering  the  conditions  of  the 
enlightened modern society in Western Europe. The Yazidi shall be given a chance to continue 
and increase their culture in a peaceful way. The association does community service to bring 
together  people  who  left  their  home  and  builds  bridges  between  the  German  society  and 
migrants of Kurdish origin. The association also provides support in different life situations and 
problem areas, working in different fields.  
  
Working fields (as described by the association): 
 
Social work 
The  Yazidi  in  Germany  are facing  a  society  with  different  values,  norms and  habits.  They  are 
exposed  to  continuous  culture-related  conflicts  and  therefore  tend  to  be  more  susceptible  to 
psychosomatic disorders. Due to these psycho-social difficulties, a minority-specific treatment is 
required. The association of the Yazidi in Oldenburg has the necessary cultural background and 
understanding for this. 
 
Intercultural meetings 
Many people talk about integration and actually refer to assimilation. A lot of people talk about a 
multicultural society within the frame of their own definition of the concept  of culture and don’t 
ask the affected people what they think about it. We (the Yazidi Association) think: multicultural 
society means the cohabitation of different cultures. Thus, the Forum is in favor of a multicultural 

