Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Translocated effectors of Yersinia
Hiroyuki Matsumoto and Glenn M Young

Currently, all known translocated effectors of Yersinia are
delivered into host cells by type III secretion systems
(T3SSs). Pathogenic Yersinia maintain the plasmid-encoded
Ysc T3SS for the speciﬁc delivery of the well-studied Yop
effectors. New horizons for effector biology have opened with
the discovery of the Ysps of Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B, which
are translocated into host cells by the chromosome-endoded
Ysa T3SS. The reported arsenal of effectors is likely to expand
since genomic analysis has revealed gene-clusters in some
Yersinia that code for other T3SSs. These efforts also revealed
possible type VI secretion (T6S) systems, which may
indicate that translocation of effectors occurs by multiple
mechanisms.

Address
Department of Food Science and Technology, Robert Mondavi South
Laboratory Building, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue,
Davis, CA 95616, USA

Corresponding author: Matsumoto, Hiroyuki (hmatsumoto@ucdavis.edu)
and Young, Glenn M (gmyoung@ucdavis.edu)

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

This review comes from a themed issue on
Host-microbe interactions: bacteria
Edited by Brendan Kenny and Raphael Valdivia

1369-5274/$ – see front matter
# 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI 10.1016/j.mib.2008.12.005

Introduction
The genus Yersinia includes three human pathogens.
The most infamous is the black death agent Y. pestis,
which causes bubonic plague when it is transmitted by
the bite of a ﬂea and pneumonic plague when it is
acquired through aerosol transmission [1]. By contrast,
Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis are enteropatho-
gens transmitted by consumption of contaminated food
or water [2]. These two organisms cause gastrointestinal
syndromes that can develop into fatal septicemia in
patients with compromised or underdeveloped immune
systems. Regardless of the species and type of disease
that ensues, translocation of toxic virulence effectors into
host cells by type III secretion (T3S) systems plays an
essential role in determining the outcome of a Yersinia
infection. There are two recognized groups of effector
proteins delivered by T3SSs among the Yersinia; the Yops
and the Ysps.

Yop effectors and the innate immune
response
Interestingly, despite the various modes of transmission
and diseases caused by the pathogenic Yersinia, they
commonly have the plasmid-encoded Ysc T3SS for the
delivery of six Yop effectors (YopE, YopH, YpkA/YopO,
YopM, YopJ/P, and YopT) (Table 1). Efforts to determine
the biochemical activities of the Yops have revealed that
many targets are cellular components that inﬂuence the
host innate immune response (Figure 1). This arm of the
immune system serves as the front line of defense against
an invasive pathogen [3]. Macrophages and neutrophils
are important elements of the early innate immune
response and serve as sentries that take up and then
inactivate invading bacteria. These cells, which act along
with other facets of the innate immune response, are
induced following the recognition of pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPS) by the family of pattern-
recognition receptors (PRRs) located on a variety of cell
types. In response to PRR agonists or PAMPS, such as
LPS or ﬂagellin, signals are transduced and converged to
activate multiple MAPKs and the NF-kB signaling path-
ways. This inﬂammatory response in turn leads to the
production of numerous proinﬂammatory cytokines, in-
cluding TNF-a, IL-12 and IL-18.

Given the important role that the MAPKs and NF-kB
signaling pathways play in the earliest stages of the
immune response, it is not surprising that one strategy
of pathogenic Yersinia is to interfere with these essential
signaling components [4–6]. It is well established that
YopJ/P is a potent inhibitor of multiple MAPK and NF-
kB pathways [7]. Recent studies have clariﬁed the bio-
chemical nature of YopJ/P activity by revealing that it is
an enzyme that acetylates serine and threonine residues
in the activation loop of MKKs and IKKs [8,9,10].
This modiﬁcation effectively blocks the residues from
being phosphorylated and results in an inhibition of their
activation thereby affecting cytokine production and
inducing apoptosis of macrophages.

Phagocytosis of bacteria requires reorganization of the
actin cytoskeleton through a process that is regulated by
Rho family GTPases [11]. YopE is a Rho GTPase-acti-
vating protein (RhoGAP) that has been shown to stimu-
late GTP hydrolysis,
thereby interfering with actin
depolymerization mediated by the Rho family of proteins
[12,13]. In addition to GTPase activation, it has been
shown that membrane anchoring is also required for the
activation of RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42. Membrane anchor-
ing occurs as the result of a post-translational modiﬁcation
resulting in C-terminal prenylation at a cysteine residue.

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

www.sciencedirect.com

