Self Study V - Caroline Graf

2014/01/05

Exercise 1

The Role of Research in Psychology, Part IV: The problems of generalisation and decision-making in
research: Chance findings and sample size

• Overview

◦ In psychology: Generalisation because striving for universalism

▪ BUT: How to draw the limits to whether a finding is universal/can be replicated or was just

a matter of chance?! → sampling procedures and statistical significance

◦ Psychological research is concerned with samples of people rather than with individuals

◦ Problem with sample population: usually just most convenient population (e.g. Psy students) →

no random sampling from specified population (sample population biased)

◦ generalisation: universalism = assumption that behavioral effects found in experiments are the

same for all people → “no need for ensuring that sample is representative”

▪ → overgeneralization?!

◦ statistical analysis = “how safe” is it to generalize from a given sample data set to all people?

◦ General  procedure:  Assume that the H0 was true and then comparing found data to effect

claimed by H0

◦ With an alpha = 5  percent:  the  probability of a finding being due to chance when the null
hypothesis is in fact true is 5 times out of 100, or less. Results that meet this criterion are called
statistically significant, otherwise they are statistically non-significant

◦ sample size is important (the bigger → the more likely that statistically significant)

•

Introduction

◦ Are we justified to make more general claims about findings of our research beyond research

itself?

◦ Three themes:

▪ lack of limitations placed on generalisation by the universalism of psychological theory.

▪ limitations placed on generalisation by the sampling methods used.

▪ limitations placed on generalisation by the structures of statistical significance testing.

◦ issues such as the generalisability of data are really aspects of process of decision-making that a

researcher makes throughout their research

• Universalism

◦ characteristic of psychology: tendency towards universalism

◦ universalism: The principles of psychology will not vary; psychological findings will apply
anywhere to anybody irrespective of social status, culture... → finding is true of all people
(there are exceptions: in rare cases, it's implied that findings are only for a certain population)
“psychological principles = laws of human nature”

◦ historically: also generalisation from animals to humans (Pavlov, Skinner)

