PLoS BIOLOGY

A Model of the Ventral Visual System Based
on Temporal Stability and Local Memory

Reto Wyss1,3, Peter Ko¨ nig1,2*, Paul F. M. J. Verschure1,4
1 Institute of Neuroinformatics, University/ETH Zu¨ rich, Zu¨ rich, Switzerland, 2 Institute of Cognitive Science, University Osnabru¨ ck, Neurobiopsychologie, Osnabru¨ ck,
Germany, 3 Computation and Neural Systems, California Institute of Technology, Division of Biology, Pasadena, California, United States of America, 4 ICREA and Technology
Department, University Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain

The cerebral cortex is a remarkably homogeneous structure suggesting a rather generic computational machinery.
Indeed, under a variety of conditions, functions attributed to specialized areas can be supported by other regions.
However, a host of studies have laid out an ever more detailed map of functional cortical areas. This leaves us with the
puzzle of whether different cortical areas are intrinsically specialized, or whether they differ mostly by their position in
the processing hierarchy and their inputs but apply the same computational principles. Here we show that the
computational principle of optimal stability of sensory representations combined with local memory gives rise to a
hierarchy of processing stages resembling the ventral visual pathway when it is exposed to continuous natural stimuli.
Early processing stages show receptive fields similar to those observed in the primary visual cortex. Subsequent stages
are selective for increasingly complex configurations of local features, as observed in higher visual areas. The last stage
of the model displays place fields as observed in entorhinal cortex and hippocampus. The results suggest that
functionally heterogeneous cortical areas can be generated by only a few computational principles and highlight the
importance of the variability of the input signals in forming functional specialization.

Citation: Wyss R, Ko¨ nig P, Verschure PFMJ (2006) A model of the ventral visual system based on temporal stability and local memory. PLoS Biol 4(5): e120. DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pbio.0040120

Introduction

The processing of visual information is a fundamental
computational task for the brain involving various cortical
and subcortical regions. Starting at the retina and thalamus,
visual information passes through a series of hierarchically
organized cortical regions eventually reaching higher cogni-
tive structures such as the hippocampus [1]. Experimental
studies have shown that the different levels of the ventral
visual hierarchy form increasingly complex and speciﬁc
representations of the visual input such as three-dimensional
objects and faces in the inferotemporal cortex (IT) [2–5] and
an allocentric representation of space in entorhinal cortex [6]
and hippocampus [7]. This process is accompanied by an
increasing degree of invariance to various stimulus properties
[8]. Thus, the ventral visual stream presents itself as a
hierarchical system with widely varying properties at differ-
ent processing levels.

In recent years, different models of the ventral visual
system have been proposed that aim to account for these
properties [9–13]. Although most of these theoretical studies
emphasize the important role of learning for the adaptation
of a visual system, it is often limited to certain stages of
processing only or performed on artiﬁcial stimuli, both with
respect to their temporal and spatial properties. Further-
more, none of these models considers levels of the visual
hierarchy as high as the entorhinal cortex or hippocampus. In
a complementary line of research, theoretical studies have
shown that prominent computational properties of the
primary visual cortex can be described by means of so-called
objective functions. Important examples are optimally sparse
representations resembling simple cells [14–16] and optimally
stable representations giving rise to complex cells [11,17–19].
It remains unresolved, however, whether objective functions

can describe general principles underlying cortical organ-
ization. Here we show that the objective of optimal stability of
sensory representations combined with local memory can
generate a hierarchy of cortical-like processing stages
resembling the ventral visual pathway. This model visual
hierarchy is generated on the basis of visual stimuli
encountered by a mobile robot exploring a complex real-
world environment. We show that the receptive ﬁelds at the
lowest level of the hierarchy share properties with those
observed in the primary visual cortex, that higher levels are
selective for complex conﬁgurations, as observed in the IT,
and that the last stage of the model ventral visual system
displays place ﬁelds as observed in entorhinal cortex and
hippocampus [7]. These results suggest that a substantial part
of the visual system can be understood based on a small
number of principles.

Results

We investigate the adaptation and specialization of areas in
a hierarchically organized visual processing stream using both
a real-world robot, as well as a simulated virtual approx-
imation (see Materials and Methods). The agents are

Academic Editor: Larry Abbott, Columbia University, United States of America

Received April 13, 2005; Accepted February 14, 2006; Published April 18, 2006

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040120

Copyright: Ó 2006 Wyss et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author
and source are credited.

Abbreviations: IT, inferotemporal cortex; RF, receptive field

* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: pkoenig@uos.de

PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org

0001

May 2006 | Volume 4 | Issue 5 | e120

