What Does Neuroethics Have to Say About the Problem of Dual Use? !

Questions to Bartoluucci and Dando: !

 !!!!

The problem of dual use seems to be deﬁned mainly historically. It seems to be reasonable to say 
that some scientiﬁc advancements have been used in an ethically questionable manner and that 
the researchers involved can not be exempt from responsibility for those advancements. !
But today there is a multitude of highly potent weapons in all kinds of varieties. If one really 
questions that advancements will be used in an ethical manner, one can not trust that existing 
technology will be used in an ethical manner. As existing technology is often crude and imprecise 
compared to what is scientiﬁcally achievable should one not engage in research to give more 
precise tools to those engaging in unethical behaviour to reduce casualties? !
As an example one might use carpet bombing. As carpet bombing is considered an unjust practice 
of war (but the US Army still likes to strike with area-effect) they used clusterbombs in the  2003 
Iraq war. Clusterbombs had the undesired side effect of leaving large portions of unexploded 
ordnance in the area. The remains of the clusterbombs caused many dead and the weapon was 
rightly designated an unjust method of warfare. The US Army therefore started recently research 
into iron cast ductile warheads, which should yield the same deadly area of effect attack, but not 
leave explosive remains.!
The example (although weak from the standpoint that it does not feature a case of dual use) 
should show that the use of weapons is not necessitated by what weapons are available, but of the 
intention of the user to destroy. Therefore it seems prudent to create such weapons, that only 
cause destruction within the intended parameters. If iron cast ductile warheads (although still a 
horrible weapon) would have been used in Iraq, a lot of lives would (probably) been saved.!
This example might be extended to neuroscience, where sufﬁciently deadly agents and 
mechanisms already have been researched. A soldier can already be made fearless, painless and 
enormously durable (for a limited time, but sufﬁcient for military purposes). Further research into 
this area might yield solely beneﬁcial results in comparison - for example soldiers that can still 
make calm rational decision after 48 hours of not sleeping or being in a hostile environment. Or 
nerve agents/directed weapons that incapacitate instead of killing. (Especially considering how 
many people are killed by police in the US a direct weapon that is non-lethal (but superior to a 
taser) should maybe be a research priority).!

