9812

Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2008, 47, 9812–9833

Crystal Shape Engineering

Michael A. Lovette, Andrea Robben Browning, Derek W. Grifﬁn, Jacob P. Sizemore,
Ryan C. Snyder, and Michael F. Doherty*
Department of Chemical Engineering, UniVersity of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106-5080

In an industrial crystallization process, crystal shape strongly inﬂuences end-product quality and functionality,
as well as downstream processing. In addition, nucleation events, solvent effects, and polymorph selection
play critical roles in both the design and operation of a crystallization plant and the patentability of the product
and process. Therefore, investigation of these issues, with respect to a priori prediction, is (and will continue
to be) an important avenue of research. In this review, we discuss the state-of-the-art in modeling crystallization
processes over a range of length scales relevant to nucleation through process design. We also identify
opportunities for continued research and speciﬁc areas where signiﬁcant advancements are needed.

1. Introduction

Crystallization from solution is a process used in the chemical
industries for the preparation of many types of solids (e.g.,
pharmaceutical products, chemical
intermediates, specialty
chemicals, catalysts). Several key properties of the resultant
materials originate from this process, including chemical purity
and composition, internal structure (polymorphic state), size and
shape distributions, and defect density (crystallinity). Size and
shape distributions impact various solid properties, including
end-use efﬁcacy (e.g., bioavailability for pharmaceuticals,1
reactivity for catalytics2), ﬂowability, wettability,3-5 and adhe-
sion.6 In turn, these properties impact downstream processing
efﬁciency (e.g., ﬁltering/drying times and the possible need for
milling), as well as storage and handling.

The desired size and shape distributions of a crystalline
product will vary, depending on its application. For example,
needle-shaped (i.e., high-aspect-ratio) crystals are well-known
to process,7 making them undesirable for
to be difﬁcult
pharmaceutical applications. However, needlelike shapes are key
to several other applications (e.g., ZnO nanowires for solar
cells8), and, in these cases, crystal shapes are engineered to be
as needlelike as possible.

Because of the broad impact of crystal size and shape distribu-
tions, general methodologies for the prediction, measurement, and
improvement of crystal size and shape are desired for product and
process design. While these topics have been studied for over one
hundred years, recent breakthroughs in experimental techniques,
modeling, and simulation have led to an improved understanding
of crystal growth from solution. This article reviews some of these
developments and presents a path for future progress.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. It begins
with a review of recent advances in the understanding of
nucleation phenomena, highlighting experiments and simulations
that have provided insight into the size, shape, and structure of
critical-sized nuclei. The shapes of larger crystals are discussed
next. This discussion begins with a description of nonmecha-
nistic models and then moves to a detailed discussion of crystal
growth mechanisms. This is followed by a review of current

modeling, experimental, and simulation techniques for obtaining
crystal shapes. Efforts in shape modiﬁcation through the use of
additives are described next, followed by methods to predict
dynamics of crystal shapes evolving in time. Finally, crystal
shape is discussed, along with crystal size, in the context of
population balance models.

2. Nucleation and Polymorph Selection

The role of nucleation in polymorph selection is of particular
industrial interest. The polymorph (different crystal structures
of the same molecule) obtained can have a large impact on the
ﬁnal utility (for example, the Ritonavir case9) and patentability
of a crystalline product. Different polymorphs can have different
physical properties, such as stability, hardness, color, solubility,
dissolution rate, and bioavailablity.10 Recent experiments have
shown that the internal structure of a crystal may be set during
nucleation.11 Furthermore, experiments have shown that a
seeded polymorph may not appear exclusively in the ﬁnal
crystallization product.12 A method to predict the observed
polymorph is an important goal in the study of nucleation.
However, a more fundamental knowledge of nucleation must
be achieved before predictive tools can be perfected.

Traditionally, classical nucleation theory (CNT) has been used
to describe gas, liquid, and solid nucleation.13-18 Classical
nucleation theory was explained by Gibbs in the 1870s,13 and
it has proven useful for understanding nucleation in a variety
of systems, in particular, gases and liquids. Nonetheless, Gibbs
himself questioned its validity for solid nucleation.

CNT is based on the total change of the free energy of the system
during a nucleation event. In a nucleation event, energy is decreased
by the creation of the new lower-energy phase (see the ﬁrst term
in eq 1), and energy is increased via the formation of an interface
between the two phases (see the second term in eq 1). For a
spherical nucleus, the change in Gibbs free energy resulting from
the creation of a nucleus with radius r is given by

3(πr3∆µ

VM

) + 4πr2γ

∆G ) -4

(1)

* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel.: (805) 893-
5309. Fax: (805) 893-4731. E-mail address: mfd@engineering.ucsb.edu.

where VM is the molar volume of the solid nucleus, γ the speciﬁc
surface energy of the solid-liquid interface (which, in this case,

10.1021/ie800900f CCC: $40.75  2008 American Chemical Society

Published on Web 11/13/2008

