606

the journal of philosophy

EXPLANATORY GAMES*

A philosophical theory of explanation must solve many prob-

lems. It must provide a descriptive account of the explana-
tory activity of scientists in the different domains of science.
It must show how this activity differs from the provision of common-
sensical explanations permanently offered in everyday life by ordinary
people and how the explanatory practices evolve over time in dif-
ferent social arenas. It must also account for the fact that explana-
tory activities very often, if not always, take place under conditions
of a cognitive division of labor in which different participants in
the explanatory enterprise undertake different tasks and assume
different roles. In a nutshell, a philosophical theory of explanation
must be able to provide an adequate descriptive account of the dif-
ferent facets of the explanatory activity, a task which is much harder
than it prima facie appears.

Such a theory must also provide standards for judging the quality of
the outcomes of the explanatory activity. Some explanations are better
in certain respects than others, and a set of norms is necessary for pro-
viding judgments of their quality. Some explanations provided in every-
day life and in science can be more accurate, simpler, or closer to truth
than alternatives that are on offer. They might be able to provide a
better understanding of the subject matter that they are supposed to
deal with, and they might be much easier to use when one wants to
intervene in the world on the basis of them. In short, normative rules
for adjudicating among the explanations offered in different social
contexts are needed and must be worked out and debated critically.

These diverse aims that a philosophical theory of explanation must
accomplish are of both a descriptive and a normative nature. Stated dif-
ferently, a philosophical theory of explanation is to provide solutions

* I would like to thank Hans Albert, Theodore Arabatzis, Martin Carrier, Volker
Gadenne, Jens Harbecke, Carl-David Mildenberger, Stathis Psillos, and two anony-
mous reviewers for many helpful comments on earlier versions of this article. Talks
based upon this paper were presented at the 14th International Congress of Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science in July 2011 in Nancy, at the University of
Bielefeld in November 2011, at the University of Athens in March 2012, at the Tech-
nical University of Munich in June 2012, at the 86th Joint Session of the Aristotelian
Society and the Mind Association in Stirling in July 2012, at the 8th Congress of the
Gesellschaft für Analytische Philosophie (GAP) in Constance in September 2012, at the
1st Congress of the Gesellschaft für Wissenschaftsphilosophie (GWP) in Hanover in
March 2013, and at the 23rd World Congress of Philosophy in Athens in August 2013.
I thank all participants of the above events for their comments and suggestions.

0022-362X/13/1011/606–632

ã 2013 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc.

