J Happiness Stud (2011) 12:1007–1022
DOI 10.1007/s10902-010-9241-7

R E S E A R C H P A P E R

Relations Among Mindfulness, Achievement-Related
Self-Regulation, and Achievement Emotions

Andrew J. Howell • Karen Buro

Published online: 14 December 2010
Ó Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

Abstract Mindfulness has been hypothesized to directly facilitate well-being, and to
indirectly do so by enhancing self-regulated functioning. No prior research has examined
these relationships in the domain of academic achievement. The current study tested
relationships among mindfulness, achievement-related self-regulation (e.g., delay-of-
gratiﬁcation, help-seeking, and self-control) and achievement emotions among a sample of
290 undergraduate students. Results revealed that indices of mindfulness, achievement-
related self-regulation, and achievement emotions were signiﬁcantly inter-correlated. And,
results supported the hypothesis that the prediction of achievement emotions by mind-
fulness was mediated by greater self-regulation over achievement. Results are considered
in light of recent evidence for associations among mindfulness, self-regulation, and well-
being in other domains of functioning; with respect to theoretical and practical implica-
tions; and with respect to the possible fruitfulness of research bridging self-regulation as a
character strength and achievement-related functioning.
Keywords Mindfulness  Achievement  Self-regulation  Emotions  Well-being

Self-regulated learning is associated with greater academic performance (e.g., Zimmerman
2008), but also with a host of additional adaptive outcomes, including well-being (Howell
2009). As deﬁned by Pintrich (2000), self-regulated learning refers to the ‘‘active, con-
structive process whereby learners set goals for their learning and then attempt to monitor,
regulate, and control their cognition, motivation, and behaviour, guided and constrained by
their goals and the contextual features in the environment’’ (p. 453). Achievement-related
variables related to goal adoption (e.g., implicit theories of ability, achievement goal
orientations) as well as variables related to the extent to which goals are effectively
pursued and attained (e.g., help-seeking, delay-of-gratiﬁcation; learning strategies usage;
self-control; and procrastination) form a portion of the nomological network of self-reg-
ulated learning (Zeidner et al. 2000; Zimmerman 2008).

A. J. Howell (&)  K. Buro
Grant MacEwan University, Edmonton, AB, Canada
e-mail: howella@macewan.ca

123

