JCMS 2002 Volume 40. Number 2.  pp. 235–58

Normative Power Europe: A Contradiction in
Terms?*

IAN MANNERS
University of Kent at Canterbury

Abstract

Twenty years ago, in the pages of the Journal of Common Market Studies, Hedley
Bull launched a searing critique of the European Community’s ‘civilian power’ in
international affairs. Since that time the increasing role of the European Union (EU)
in areas of security and defence policy has led to a seductiveness in adopting the
notion of ‘military power Europe’. In contrast, I will attempt to argue that by think-
ing beyond traditional conceptions of the EU’s international role and examining the
case study of its international pursuit of the abolition of the death penalty, we may
best conceive of the EU as a ‘normative power Europe’.

Introduction

‘Europe’ is not an actor in international affairs,
and does not seem likely to become one … (Bull, 1982, p. 151)

With these now renowned words Hedley Bull, the pre-eminent writer of the
‘English School’ of international relations theory, dismissed the suggestion
that the European Community (EC) represented a ‘civilian power’ in interna-
tional relations and endeared himself to a generation of European studies schol-
ars. Bull was responding to the suggestions of writers such as François Duchêne
who claimed that traditional military power had given way to progressive
civilian  power  as  the  means  to  exert  influence  in  international  relations
(Duchêne, 1972, 1973). Bull’s argument forms the starting point for my dis-

* I am very grateful to Ruth Abbey, Mathias Albert, Barry Buzan, Thomas Diez, Mervyn Frost, Stefano
Guzzini, Ulf Hedetoft, Anna Home, Knud Erik Jørgensen, Catarina Kinnvall, Dora Kostakopoulou, Anna
Leander,  Marika  Lerch,  Ben  Rosamond,  Thomas  Saalfeld,  Justus  Schonlau,  Karen  Smith,  Hidemi
Suganami, Richard Whitman, and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments.

© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2002, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA

