CHILD DEVELOPMENT PERSPECTIVES

Autonomy and Relatedness Revisited: Cultural

Manifestations of Universal Human Needs

Heidi Keller

University of Osnabrueck

ABSTRACT—Autonomy and relatedness are considered basic
human needs that manifest differently in different cultural
environments in response to contextual demands. This arti-
cle conceptualizes 3 types of cultural environments—proto-
typical Western, urban, middle-class families; prototypical
rural, subsistence-based farming families; and a hybrid
milieu of urban middle-class families from non-Western
environments—and proposes that autonomy and related-
ness have different meanings in each type. In contexts in
which individuals have a high degree of formal education
(Western and non-Western middle-class families), there is
an emphasis on inner states and mental representations.
Western middle-class families focus on separate individuals;
non-Western middle-class families focus on the family as a
social unit. In contexts in which individuals have a low
degree of formal education, there is a primary emphasis on
social responsibilities. Different socialization strategies
support adaptive frameworks in each of the 3 types of con-
texts: individual psychological autonomy in Western mid-
dle-class families, communal psychological autonomy in
non-Western middle-class families, and action autonomy in
subsistence-based farming families. All conceptions of
autonomy and relatedness can be considered as universal
competencies, yet they are differently emphasized in differ-
ent cultural milieus due to differing contextual demands.

KEYWORDS—cultural milieus;
psychological
responsibility.

autonomy;

action

socialization strategies;
social

autonomy;

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Heidi Keller, Department of Culture and Development, Institute of
Psychology, University of Osnabru¨ck, Artilleriestr. 34, 49076
Osnabru¨ck, Germany; e-mail: heidi.keller@uni-osnabrueck.de.

ª 2011 The Author
Child Development Perspectives ª 2011 The Society for Research in Child Development
DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-8606.2011.00208.x

The need for autonomy and the need for relatedness can be con-
sidered as part of panhuman psychology. For healthy develop-
ment and well-being, individuals need communion as well as
agency (Bakan, 1966), love and belongingness as well as self-
actualization (Maslow, 1968), and closeness and interdepen-
dence with others as well as control over one’s own life (Ryan &
Deci, 2000). Humans acquire conceptions of autonomy and
relatedness during ontogenetic development through participa-
tion in everyday situations and routines. Yet the cultural mes-
sages that are embodied in everyday situations and routines
differ substantially across environmental contexts (Cowley,
Moodley, & Fiori-Cowley, 2004; Csordas, 1999; Keller, 2007;
Ochs & Izquierdo, 2009). Therefore, as a consequence of these
ontogenetic processes, individuals’ conceptions of autonomy and
relatedness will necessarily vary between different environments.
Over the past few decades, researchers have proposed various
conceptualizations of the relation between autonomy and related-
ness, ranging from the bipolar, unidimensional deﬁnition of indi-
vidualism⁄ collectivism (Hofstede, 2001; Triandis, 1995) to the
coexistence of independent dimensions (Deci & Ryan, 1991;
Kag˘itcibas¸ i, 1996; Kitayama & Uchida, 2005; Kuhl & Keller,
2008; Raeff, 2010). The premise of the bipolar, unidimensional
model of individualism⁄ collectivism is that autonomy and relat-
edness are mutually dependent constructs on the same contin-
uum. Individuals’ levels of autonomy and relatedness depend,
therefore, on the position that they occupy on the continuum: A
position closer to the autonomy pole excludes the existence of
relatedness to a large degree, and vice versa. Arising from multi-
ple criticisms of this conceptualization (e.g., Kag˘itcibas¸ i, 2007;
Killen & Wainryb, 2000; Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmelmeier,
2002; Raeff, 2010) are claims that autonomy and relatedness
coexist and need to coexist because they are both universal
human needs that are part of any human action and situation.
Kag˘itcibas¸ i (2007), for example, argues that individuals can be
autonomous as well as relational at the same time. Similar pro-
posals include the conceptions of interdependent agency (Yeh,
Bedford, & Yang, 2009), conjoint agency (Markus & Kitayama,

Volume 6, Number 1, 2012, Pages 12–18

