Review

TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Vol.10 No.7 July 2006

Special Issue: Probabilistic models of cognition

Bayesian decision theory in
sensorimotor control
Konrad P. Ko¨ rding1 and Daniel M. Wolpert2

1Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Building NE46-4053, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02139, USA
2Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK

Action selection is a fundamental decision process for
us, and depends on the state of both our body and the
environment. Because signals in our sensory and motor
systems are corrupted by variability or noise, the
nervous system needs to estimate these states. To
select an optimal action these state estimates need to be
combined with knowledge of the potential costs or
rewards of different action outcomes. We review recent
studies that have investigated the mechanisms used by
the nervous system to solve such estimation and
decision problems, which show that human behaviour
is close to that predicted by Bayesian Decision Theory.
This theory deﬁnes optimal behaviour in a world
characterized by uncertainty, and provides a coherent
way of describing sensorimotor processes.

Introduction
The central nervous system (CNS) constantly sends motor
commands to our muscles. Determining the appropriate
motor command is fundamentally a decision process. At
each point in time we must select one particular motor
command from the set of possible motor commands. Two
components jointly deﬁne the decision problem: knowl-
edge of the state of the world (including our own body) and
knowledge of our objectives.

The sensory inputs of humans are plagued by noise
[1,2] which means that we will always have uncertainty
about our hand’s true location (Figure 1a). This uncer-
tainty depends on the modality of the sensory input: when
we use proprioception to locate our hand we may have
more uncertainty about its position compared to when we
can see it. Moreover, our muscles produce noisy outputs
[3,4] and when we quickly move to a target location
(shown as a red ! in Figure 1a) our ﬁnal hand position
will typically deviate from the intended target. Even if our
sensors were perfect they would only tell us about the part
of the world that we can currently sense. This uncertainty
places the problem of estimating the state of the world and
the control of our motor system within a statistical
framework. Bayesian statistics [5–8] provides a systema-
tic way of solving problems in the presence of uncertainty
(see the online article by Grifﬁths and Yuille associated
with this issue: Supplementary material online).

Corresponding author: Ko¨rding, K.P. (kording@mit.edu).

The approach of Bayesian statistics is characterized by
assigning probabilities to any degree of belief about the
state of the world (see also Conceptual Foundations
editorial by Chater, Tenenbaum and Yuille).

Bayesian statistics deﬁnes how new information should
be combined with prior beliefs and how information from
several modalities should be integrated. Bayesian decision
theory [9–11] deﬁnes how our beliefs should be combined
with our objectives to make optimal decisions. Under-
standing the way the CNS deals with uncertainty might
be key to understanding its normal mode of operation.

The cost of each movement (such as energy consumed)
must be weighed against the potential rewards that can be
obtained by moving. In the framework of decision theory a
utility function should quantify the overall desirability of
the outcome of a movement decision. We should choose a
movement so that as to maximize utility. Several recent
papers have addressed what functions people optimize
with their movements. Understanding what human
subjects try to optimize is a necessary step towards a
rational theory of movement selection.

The selection of a movement can be described as the
rational choice of the movement that maximizes utility
according to decision theory (see Box 1). This approach
thus asks why people behave the way they do. An
increasing number of laboratories have addressed this
question within this framework. Here we review recent
studies that ﬁnd human movement performance to be
close to the predictions obtained from optimally combining
probability estimates with movement costs and rewards.
The approach has the potential to embed human
behaviour into a coherent mathematical framework.

Estimation using Bayes rule
We need to estimate the variables that are relevant for our
choice of movement. For example, when playing tennis we
may want to estimate where the ball will bounce. Because
vision does not provide perfect information about the ball’s
velocity there is uncertainty as to the bounce location.
However, if we know about the noise in our sensory system
then the sensory input can be used to compute the
likelihood – the probability of getting the particular
sensory inputs for different possible bounce locations
(shown in red in Figure 1b). We can combine this with
information that is available over repeated experience of
tennis: the position where the ball hits the ground is not

www.sciencedirect.com 1364-6613/$ - see front matter Q 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2006.05.003

