 

Functionalism 

The objection that made the identity theory in its original version disappear as quickly as it had 

risen to prominence in the 1950s was, as we saw last week, the multiple realizability argument, 

either in Putnam’s “empirical likelihood version” or in Kripke’s “imaginability version.” One 

response to this argument was to modify the identity theory in such a way as to relativize it to 

species (or subsets thereof) and to bet one’s philosophical money on something like “species-

specific identities.” The major problem with this move, however, was that if we restrict mental 

properties and their physical “correlates” to, say, species, then we can no longer hold that 

members of different species who are, say, in pain, literally share the same property. They don’t. 

One of them has S1-pain, the other S2-pain etc. But since the general property being in pain 

doesn’t correspond to a single physical property across all species, it does not occur in our list 

of physicalistically acceptable or “kosher” properties. There are then only three options: (1) 

accept being in pain as a non-physical addition to the ontology of our world (property dualism), 

(2) explain how being in pain can be a fundamentally physical property even though it is not 

straightforwardly reducible to physical properties (anti-reductionism), (3) give up the general 

property of being in pain as a property in its own right (eliminativism). Note that what is at issue 

is that the advocate of the species-specific identity theory can do to respond to the objection at 

hand. If you are an advocate of the species-specific identity theory, (1) and (2) are obviously 

not really an option. For you became an advocate of the species-specific identity theory in the 

first place because you were convinced of a reductive version of physicalism. (1) would mean giving 

up physicalism; (2) would mean giving up reductionism. Hence, only (3) is left. 

Some advocates of the species-specific identity theory (Kim, for instance) have indeed 

bitten the bullet and have denied that there is such a general property like being in pain. They 

argue that not every predicate that we use in our everyday language corresponds to a property. 

We use the predicate “is in pain” for pragmatic reasons to pick out a group of individuals, viz., 

those who are in some form of pain or other, although there is no single pain property that 

they and only they share—this property has been eliminated. For those who don’t find that 

attractive, and who find property dualism equally attractive, the only way out seems to be (2), 

i.e., to hold that, to stick to the example, being in pain is a fundamentally physical property that 

is, however, not straightforwardly reducible to physical properties. It is an irreducible physical 

property. One of the most important way to spell out this position is, of course, functionalism. 

According to Putnam, his multiple realizability argument shows that being in pain is not a 

physical property of the brain (or even the whole nervous system), but another kind of 

