Chapter V

THE HEART HAS ITS REASONS

THAT REASON and passion are antithetical has long been an article of
philosophical faith, less often argued than assumed. Emotive theories of
ethics automatically construe themselves as noncognitive, and aesthetic
theories that assign emotion a role in appreciation typically take them-
selves thereby to exclude art and its objects from the cognitive realm.
Opposing stereotypes may account for complacency about the dichot-
omy. Stereotypical beliefs are cool, calm, settled convictions; stereotypical
emotions are visceral, volatile, violent agitations. We would hardly put
belief in the inverse square law in the same class as Othello’s obsessive
jealousy. Nor would we feel remiss about failing to justify the decision to
assign them to disjoint classes. But actual beliefs and emotions diverge
considerably from such simplistic stereotypes. Unwavering affection for a
lifelong friend may be as stable, justiﬁable, and unperturbing as the belief
that buffaloes once roamed the West; the momentary conviction that
the home team is about to squander its commanding lead, as transient,
unreasonable, and distressing as a stab of envy at a friend’s good fortune.
Emotions and beliefs can be enduring or ephemeral, calm or agitating,
rational or irrational. Neither class of attitudes seems to possess any
qualiﬁcation for epistemic standing that the other lacks. That activation of
passion involves abdication of reason is thus far from obvious. Even if
Lear’s rage is cognitively incapacitating, Huckleberry Finn’s trepidation
over Aunt Sally’s plans to civilize him is not. If a response like Huck’s can
be at once cognitive and affective, epistemology’s alienation of affections
is unjustiﬁed.

Relatively recently, cognitivist theories of emotion have emerged to
counter the traditional view.1 They are ineffective though, because they
construe the realm of the cognitive too narrowly. Typically they take an
emotion to embed a belief, a belief to be an attitude toward a proposition,
and the cognitive status of the emotion to derive from that of the belief it
embeds.2 Thus Fiona’s fear of frogs is cognitive because it embeds her
belief that frogs are dangerous. She would not—indeed could not—fear
frogs, it is said, unless she harbored such a belief. This is just false. The

1 See John Deigh, “Cognitivism in the Theory of Emotions,” Ethics 104 (1994):

824–854.

2 See, for example, Anthony Kenny, Action, Emotion, and Will (London: Routledge and

Kegan Paul, 1963), 187–194.

