Language evolution and linguistic norms 

Nikola Kompa (University of Osnabrueck) 

19/10/14 – working draft 

Words  are  cheap  token,  so  why  would 
anyone believe them? 

Derek Bickerton 

Introduction 

The paper is an exercise in speculative anthropology. And here is the question that I should like 
to see answered: How might language have possibly evolved and which norms, if any, might have 
played a role in shaping it?  

For  present  purposes,  language  may  be  best  characterized  by  what  it  enables  us  to  do,  by  the 
function  it  serves.  Yet  language  answers  many  purposes.  Most  obviously,  it  is  a  means  of 
communication. Communication, in turn, serves different purposes. A large amount of what we 
say  each  day  is  aptly  characterized  as  small-talk  or  gossip.  Language  is,  as  John  Locke  already 
remarked “the great Instrument and common Tye of Society.“ (Locke E III.I.1) Yet language is 
as perfect a means of inclusion as of exclusion. It helps to demarcate the bounds of one’s group; 
those who speak my language (or my dialect) are those who belong to my group.  

But then, occasionally, we communicate in order to convey and share information; we say how 
thinks are–or at least how they look like from where we stand. Language allows us to describe the 
world; to acquire, store and pass information. It is a means to classify, to structure the manifold 
of appearances; by noticing similarities, we sort like things alike. We divide men into friend and 
foe, books into those worth reading and those not worth the while, our colleagues into potential 
partners for cooperation and others. Because these similarities and differences are important to 
us,  we  have  words  to  mark  them.  And  language  is  highly  productive;  it  allows  us  to  utter  and 
understand sentences that no one has ever uttered before (cf. Tallermann & Gibson 2012b). We 
are at liberty to think and express ideas and thoughts that haven’t been thought before and to 
invent  phrases  (metaphors,  for  example)  that  haven’t  been  used  before.  Moreover,  ideas  and 
thoughts can be conjured up at will. They are not simply impressed on us by the environment 
and bound to a particular situation; they are at our disposal (cf. Trabant 2008: 32). Most animal 
communication systems, on the other hand, comprise a rather restricted and mostly invariant set 
of signals that are meaningful in particular situations only and mostly bound to the here and now. 
Human beings, on the other hand are able to talk about future and past events, about possible or 
impossible events, etc. Language makes modal reasoning possible. We can describe other ways 

 

1 

