500

J. Physiol. (I952) I I7, 500-544

A QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF MEMBRANE
CURRENT AND ITS APPLICATION TO CONDUCTION

AND EXCITATION IN NERVE

BY A. L. HODGKIN AND A. F. HUXLEY

From the Physiological Laboratory, University of Cambridge

(Received 10 March 1952)

This article concludes a series of papers concerned with the flow of electric
current through the surface membrane of a giant nerve fibre (Hodgkin,
Huxley & Katz, 1952; Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952 a-c). Its general object is to
the results of the preceding papers (Part I), to put them into
discu
mathematical form (Part II) and to show that they will account for con-
duction and excitation in quantitative terms (Part III).

PART I. DISCUSSION OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

The results described in the preceding papers suggest that the electrical
behaviour of the membrane may be represented by the network shown in
Fig. 1. Current can be carried through the membrane either by charging the
membrane capacity or by movement of ion-s through the resistances in parallel
with the capacity. The ionic current is divided into components carried by
sodium and potassium ions (INa and IK), and a small 'leakage current' (I,)
made up by chloride and other ions. Each component of the ionic current is
determined by a driving force which may conveniently be measured as an
electrical potential difference and a permeability coefficient which has the
dimensions of a conductance. Thus the sodium current (INa) is equal to the
sodium conductance (9Na) multiplied by the difference between the membrane
potential (E) and the equilibrium potential for the sodium ion (ENa). Similar
equations apply to 'K and I, and are collected on p. 505.
Our experiments suggest that gNa and 9E are functions of time and
membrane potential, but that ENa, EK, El, CM and g, may be taken as
constant. The influence of membrane potential on permeability can be sum-
marized by stating: first, that depolarization causes a transient increase in
sodium conductance and a slower but maintained increase in potassium con-
ductance; secondly, that these changes are graded and that they can be
reversed by repolarizing the membrane. In order to decide whether these
effects are sufficient to account for complicated phenomena such as the action
potential and refractory period, it is necessary to obtain expressions relating

