Psychology Research and Behavior Management

Open Access Full Text Article

Dovepress

open access to scientiﬁc and medical research

R E V I E W

Behavioral treatments for children and adults  
who stutter: a review

Michael Blomgren
Department of Communication 
Sciences and Disorders, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Correspondence: Michael Blomgren 
Department of Communication 
Sciences and Disorders, University 
of Utah, 390 S. 1530 E., Rm 1210, 
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-0252, USA 
Email michael.blomgren@health.utah.edu

Abstract: This  paper  provides  a  brief  overview  of  stuttering  followed  by  a  synopsis  of 
current approaches to treat stuttering in children and adults. Treatment is discussed in terms 
of multifactorial, operant, speech restructuring, and anxiolytic approaches. Multifactorial and 
operant  treatments  are  designed  for  young  children  who  stutter.  Both  of  these  approaches 
involve parent training and differ primarily in their focus on reducing demands on the child 
(multifactorial) or in their use of response contingent stimulation (operant conditioning). Speech 
restructuring and anxiolytic approaches are used with adults who stutter. Speech restructuring 
approaches focus on the mechanics of speech production, and anxiolytic treatments tend to 
focus on the symptoms and social and vocational challenges of stuttering. The evidence base for 
these different approaches is outlined. Response contingent therapy (for children) and speech 
restructuring therapy (for adults) have the most robust empirical evidence base. Multifactorial 
treatments for children and stuttering management approaches for adults are popular but are based 
on theoretical models of stuttering; the evidence base is not robust and tends to be inferred from 
work in areas such as cognitive behavior therapy and desensitization. Comprehensive, or holistic, 
approaches to treating stuttering are also discussed. Comprehensive approaches for treating 
stuttering in adults address both improved speech ﬂuency and stuttering management.
Keywords:  stuttering,  treatment,  stuttering  management,  speech  restructuring,  cognitive 
restructuring

Introduction
Stuttering is a developmental speech disorder in which the forward ﬂow of speech 
is  interrupted  by  repetitions  of  sounds,  words,  and/or  the  prolongation  of  sounds. 
Developmental stuttering appears during the preschool years, typically between the ages 
of 2 and 4. Stuttering can be quite variable, especially in childhood. It is not uncommon 
for stuttering to appear and disappear in cycles during the preschool years. Stuttering 
in children and adults may also vary depending on the speaking context. Stuttering is 
also more pronounced when an individual is rushed or in a stressful speaking situation. 
In fact, one of the few invariant aspects of stuttering is that it is highly variable.

The reported incidence numbers for stuttering vary, but stuttering is most common 
in young children (approximately 5%). Approximately 0.5% to 1% of adults stutter.1 
These  numbers  indicate  that  most  children  (about  75%)  recover  from  stuttering 
naturally, although obviously not all do. Currently, no foolproof indicators exist to 
determine if an individual child will naturally stop stuttering or not; however, gender 
and family history of natural recovery appear to be predictors of natural recovery. 
Girls are more likely to stop stuttering than boys and children with a family history 

submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress 
http://dx.doi.org./10.2147/PRBM.S31450

Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2013:6 9–19
© 2013 Blomgren, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd. This is an Open Access article  
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.

9

