R E V I E W S

MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE IN
CANCER: ROLE OF ATP-DEPENDENT
TRANSPORTERS

Michael M. Gottesman, Tito Fojo and Susan E. Bates

Chemotherapeutics are the most effective treatment for metastatic tumours. However, the ability
of cancer cells to become simultaneously resistant to different drugs — a trait known as
multidrug resistance — remains a significant impediment to successful chemotherapy.  Three
decades of multidrug-resistance research have identified a myriad of ways in which cancer cells
can elude chemotherapy, and it has become apparent that resistance exists against every
effective drug, even our newest agents. Therefore, the ability to predict and circumvent drug
resistance is likely to improve chemotherapy.

Patients who have cancer that does not respond to local
excision or radiation (about 50% of total cancer cases),
and patients with haematological malignancies, are
treated with chemotherapy, immunotherapy and bio-
logical-response modifiers. But why can some patients
be cured by these approaches and others respond tran-
siently or incompletely? Host and tumour genetic
alterations, epigenetic changes and tumour environ-
ment all seem to contribute to the complex story of
cancer drug resistance1.

Cellular mechanisms of multidrug resistance
There are two general classes of resistance to anti-
cancer drugs: those that impair delivery of anticancer
drugs to tumour cells, and those that arise in the can-
cer cell itself due to genetic and epigenetic alterations
that affect drug sensitivity. Impaired drug delivery can
result from poor absorption of orally administered
drugs, increased drug metabolism or increased excre-
tion, resulting in lower levels of drug in the blood and
reduced diffusion of drugs from the blood into the
tumour mass2,3. Recent studies have emphasized the
importance of the tumour vasculature and an appro-
priate pressure gradient for adequate drug delivery to
the tumour4. In addition, some cancer cells that are
sensitive to chemotherapy as monolayer cells in cul-
ture  become  resistant  when  transplanted  into 

animal models5. This indicates that environmental
factors, such as the extracellular matrix or tumour
geometry, might  be  involved  in  drug  resistance.
Cancer cells grown in culture as three-dimensional
spheroids, mimicking their in vivo geometry, have also
been shown to become resistant to cancer drugs2,5,6.
Much remains to be learned about this type of drug 
resistance and its role in clinical oncology.

Cellular mechanisms of drug resistance have been
intensively studied, as experimental models can be easily
generated by in vitro selection with cytotoxic agents.
Cancer cells in culture can become resistant to a single
drug, or a class of drugs with a similar mechanism of
action, by altering the drug’s cellular target or by increas-
ing repair of drug-induced damage, frequently to DNA.
After selection for resistance to a single drug, cells might
also show cross-resistance to other structurally and
mechanistically unrelated drugs — a phenomenon that
is known as MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE. This might explain why
treatment regimens that combine multiple agents with
different targets are not more effective.

As illustrated in FIG. 1, different types of cellular 
multidrug resistance have been described. Resistance to
natural-product hydrophobic drugs — sometimes
known as classical multidrug resistance — generally
results from expression of ATP-dependent efflux pumps
with broad drug specificity. These pumps belong to a

Laboratory of Cell Biology
and Cancer Therapeutics
Branch, The Center for
Cancer Research, Building
37, Room 1A09, National
Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA. Correspondence 
to M.M.G.
e-mail:
mgottesman@nih.gov
DOI: 10.1038/nrc706

48 | JANUARY 2002 | VOLUME 2  

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

