Overseas Development 

Institute

August 2011

    

Achieving pro-poor growth through 
investment in rural feeder roads:  
the role of impact evaluation

By Christian Kingombe

I mpact evaluation was high on the agenda at the 

recent  3rd  Global  Review  of  Aid-for-Trade  (AfT). 
Since the mid-2000s, interest in the analytically 
robust evaluation of the impact of projects, pro-
grammes and policies has increased amongst policy-
makers (Estache, 2010). With growing recognition of 
the links between high transport costs and poverty, 
this  trend  also  encompasses  an  increasing  interest 
in undertaking detailed evaluations of the impact of 
public investment in rural roads. This begs the ques-
tion: how do we identify what kind of public spending, 
including  AfT,  is  most  effective  in  reducing  poverty 
and generating equitable agricultural growth?

How,  for  example,  do  partner  countries  and 
donors  define  the  success  of  donor  investment  in 
rural  feeder  roads?  These  Aid-for-Trade  (AfT)  inter-
ventions  –  categorised  as  either  labour-based  or 
equipment-based rural transport infrastructure (RTI) 
– are engineered earth roads that connect rural areas 
to urban centres via the connection to secondary dis-
trict roads (Howe, 1984). Despite the large amounts 
spent on rural roads, there is remarkably little formal 
evidence on their benefits to households or to enter-
prises. What has been lacking is a general methodol-
ogy, using micro-data, to estimate these gains.

It  has  been  argued  that  RTI  and  provision  of  RTI 
services  –  including  rural  feeder  roads  –  could 
be  considered  pre-requisites  for  growth  and  the 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs). Improving access to markets, for example, 
can  lower  agricultural  input  prices  and  increase 
production (MDG1). Improving RTI and services can 

help children get to school (MDG2). But what actual  
impact  have  these  AfT  interventions  had  to  date? 
How could future research enhance this impact? And 
what  are  the  policy  implications?  This  Background 
Note  provides  suggestions  on  what  state-of-the-art 
AfT impact evaluations could look like, and why they 
should be part of a project’s design from the outset 
in order to improve policy conducive to achieving the 
MDGs.

The key issues
All countries are confronted with a range of growth 
constraints, however some of these are more severe 
and  visible  in  many  agriculture-based  low-income 
countries. Carrying out an analysis at the micro-level 
can help improve our growth diagnostics as well as 
our understanding of the transmission mechanisms 
that could lead to rural growth and poverty reduction. 
It  can,  therefore,  produce  policy-relevant  insights 
that go beyond what is known from the cross-country 
growth literature at the macro-level. 

The  general  practice  adopted  by  the  UN  Panel 
on Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) is that ex-post 
evaluations are designed as in-depth studies of the 
impact  of  an  intervention  and  are  usually  carried 
out every five to ten years after the completion of its 
funded implementation (Box 2, overleaf). 

A  good  example  following  these  guidelines  is 
Chen  et  al.  (2008),  who  revisit  the  site  of  a  large, 
World Bank-financed rural development programme 
in China ten years after it began and four years after 
disbursements  ended.  The  authors  collected  data 
on 2,000 randomly sampled households in project 

The  Overseas  Development  Institute  is  the  UK’s  leading  independent  think  tank  on  international  development  and  humanitarian  issues.  
ODI Background Notes provide a summary or snapshot of an issue or of an area of ODI work in progress. This and other Background Notes are 
available at www.odi.org.uk. 

advancing knowledge, shaping policy, inspiring practice

