Journal of Sociolinguistics 17/1, 2013: 3–36

Diffusion of language change:

Accommodation to a moving target

Marie Maegaard, Torben Juel Jensen, Tore Kristiansen

and Jens Normann Jørgensen
University of Copenhagen, Denmark

The paper focuses on motivations for the spread of new features within a
speech community, and on the trajectories the changes follow during
diffusion. One set of data represents language use, and here focus is on two
changes which have been going on in Danish over the past 40 years, one
grammatical and one phonetic. The other set of data are results from a
nationwide speaker evaluation experiment which tests the subconscious
attitudes to different types of speech among the youth in ﬁve different places
covering Denmark from east to west. Results show that changes spread
centrifugally from Copenhagen, even to the extent that reversal of changes
spreads from Copenhagen. Furthermore, the attitudes reﬂected in the
speaker evaluation experiment support the theory that language change is
motivated by social psychological factors. Finally, it is argued that it is
worthwhile considering the possibility of media being involved in processes
of linguistic change.

Artiklen fokuserer pa˚ a˚rsager til spredning af nye træk i et sprogsamfund,
og pa˚ hvordan spredningen forega˚r. Et datasæt repræsenterer sprogbrug,
og her fokuseres pa˚ to forandringer som har fundet sted i dansk gennem de
sidste 40 a˚r, en grammatisk og en fonetisk. Det andet datasæt stammer fra
en landsdækkende undersøgelse af underbevidste holdninger til forskellige
typer af talesprog blandt unge pa˚ fem forskellige steder placeret i en linje
der dækker Danmark fra øst til vest. Resultaterne viser at ændringerne i
brug spredes centrifugalt fra København, i en grad sa˚ resten af landet
følger trop ogsa˚ na˚r København reverserer en igangværende ændring.
De vurderinger der kommer
til udtryk i holdningsundersøgelserne,
understøtter teorien om at sprogforandring er motiveret af socialpsykologiske
faktorer. Til slut argumenteres der for at det er værd at overveje mediernes
mulige rolle i sprogforandringsprocesser. [Danish]

KEYWORDS: Language change, real time, grammatical variation,
phonetic variation, language attitudes, standardization

© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2013
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK, and 350 Main Street, Malden MA 02148, USA

