An unconventional
but essential marriage:
pro-poor tourism
and the mainstream industry

Pro-poor tourism has had a signiﬁcant impact on the ‘tourism and development’ 
agenda, but is unlikely to become hegemonic. Its impact on broader development 
debates, the mainstream tourism industry, and the public has been more limited. 
(cid:127)ere is an emerging conceptual framework, methodology and empirical evidence base 
to support the original claims of pro-poor tourism (PPT), that it can be pro-poor and 
can be made more so, that any type of tourism can be pro-poor, and that there are 
signiﬁcant beneﬁts for both the development sector and mainstream tourism industry 
of stronger links between the two.

By Jonathan Mitchell, Overseas Development Institute

T ourist  markets  offer  opportunities  for 

poverty  reduction.  While  most  popu-
lar  tourist  destinations  are  in  affluent 
countries,  these  opportunities  are  evident 
in  the  large  and  increasing  tourism  flows  to 
the  developing  world.  In  2008,  40%  of  in-
ternational  tourist  trips  were  to  developing 
countries  (World  Bank,  2010).  In  Figure  1, 
the  large  scale  of  tourism  in  countries  like 
Mexico,  Thailand  and  Malaysia  compared 
with  the  powerhouses  of  the  world  economy, 
like the United States, Japan and Germany, is 
clear. The emerging role of China, as a devel-
oping country tourist destination and an eco-
nomic giant, is striking.

Developing  country  tourism  is  not  the  preserve 
of  middle-income  countries.  Some  of  the  lowest 

Figure 1: Tourist-eye view of the world

income  countries,  such  as  Ethiopia,  !e  Gambia 
and Tanzania, have small tourist ﬂows by interna-
tional standards yet depend on international tour-
ism for a quarter to a third of their exports (World 
Bank, 2010). Mounting empirical evidence shows 
that  tourism  can  transfer  signiﬁcant  beneﬁts  to 
local economies and communities around tourist 
destinations,  making  a  case  for  identifying  tour-
ism as a mechanism for poverty reduction in some 
low-income countries.

Despite the potential for tourism to reduce pov-
erty,  the  impact  of  pro-poor  tourism  on  the  de-
velopment agenda is still weak. !ough impacts 
vary,  evidence  shows  the  eﬀect  of  tourism  on 
the lives of the poor. It is important for develop-
ment agencies and private operators to consider 
the beneﬁts of closer links between pro-poor and 
mainstream tourism. ...

SHOULD TOURISM 
BE PROMOTED 
IN DEVELOPING 
COUNTRIES?

Jonathan Mitchell 
is an economist and 
leads several of the 
research programs 
of the Overseas 
Development 
Institute (ODI), a 
think tank located 
in London that 
provides public 
policymakers with 
information and 
advice on poverty 
reduction. The 
author takes a 
speciﬁc interest 
in the impacts 
tourism has on 
poor households 
in developing 
countries. In 
this article, the 
author counters 
preconceived 
ideas by defending 
mainstream tourism, 
notably as a lever 
for poverty reduction.

Jonathan Mitchell 

Overseas 
Development Institute

Jonathan Mitchell is a local 
and regional economic 
development specialist with 
long-term experience in Sub-
Saharan Africa and increasing 
exposure in South-East Asia. 
His focus is value-chain 
development, local economic 
development, economic 
and ﬁnancial analyses, and 
tourism and agriculture. 
He has worked for a range 
of multilateral and bilateral 
donor organisations and 
currently heads the Protected 
Livelihoods and Agricultural 
Growth Programme at the 
London-based development 
policy ‘think tank’, the 
Overseas Development 
Institute.

The area of each country is proportional to the number of international tourist arrivals. 
Source: Worldmapper, 2006

ISSUE 7 - SEPTEMBER 2010 - SHOULD TOURISM BE PROMOTED IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES? 3

