ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 26 May 2016
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00329

Retrieval Interference in
Syntactic Processing: The Case
of Reﬂexive Binding in English

Umesh Patil 1, 2*, Shravan Vasishth 1 and Richard L. Lewis 3

1 Department of Linguistics, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany, 2 Computational Linguistics, Institute of Cognitive
Science, University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany, 3 Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,

USA

It has been proposed that in online sentence comprehension the dependency between a
reﬂexive pronoun such as himself/herself and its antecedent is resolved using exclusively
syntactic constraints. Under this strictly syntactic search account, Principle A of the
binding theory—which requires that the antecedent c-command the reﬂexive within
the same clause that the reﬂexive occurs in—constrains the parser’s search for an
antecedent. The parser thus ignores candidate antecedents that might match agreement
features of the reﬂexive (e.g., gender) but are ineligible as potential antecedents because
they are in structurally illicit positions. An alternative possibility accords no special
status to structural constraints: in addition to using Principle A, the parser also uses
non-structural cues such as gender to access the antecedent. According to cue-based
retrieval theories of memory (e.g., Lewis and Vasishth, 2005), the use of non-structural
cues should result in increased retrieval times and occasional errors when candidates
partially match the cues, even if the candidates are in structurally illicit positions. In this
paper, we ﬁrst show how the retrieval processes that underlie the reﬂexive binding are
naturally realized in the Lewis and Vasishth (2005) model. We present the predictions of
the model under the assumption that both structural and non-structural cues are used
during retrieval, and provide a critical analysis of previous empirical studies that failed
to ﬁnd evidence for the use of non-structural cues, suggesting that these failures may
be Type II errors. We use this analysis and the results of further modeling to motivate
a new empirical design that we use in an eye tracking study. The results of this study
conﬁrm the key predictions of the model concerning the use of non-structural cues,
and are inconsistent with the strictly syntactic search account. These results present
a challenge for theories advocating the infallibility of the human parser in the case of
reﬂexive resolution, and provide support for the inclusion of agreement features such as
gender in the set of retrieval cues.

Keywords: sentence processing, anaphor resolution, memory retrieval, interference, computational modeling, eye
tracking

1. INTRODUCTION

Sentence comprehension involves, among other things, recovering hierarchical structure from
an input string of words (e.g., Frazier, 1979). Such recovery requires the online application of
grammatical constraints that delimit the possible relationships between various elements of the
sentence. For example, to understand a sentence like (1), the pronoun himself has to be resolved

Edited by:

Colin Phillips,

University of Maryland, College Park,

USA

Reviewed by:

Dan Parker,

College of William & Mary, USA

Jeffrey Thomas Runner,

University of Rochester, USA

*Correspondence:

Umesh Patil

umesh.patil@gmail.com

Specialty section:

This article was submitted to

Language Sciences,

a section of the journal

Frontiers in Psychology

Received: 05 September 2015

Accepted: 22 February 2016

Published: 26 May 2016

Citation:

Patil U, Vasishth S and Lewis RL

(2016) Retrieval Interference in

Syntactic Processing: The Case

of Reﬂexive Binding in English.

Front. Psychol. 7:329.

doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00329

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

1

May 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 329

