The EMBO Journal Vol.18 No.14 pp.4023–4034, 1999

PLENA and FARINELLI: redundancy and regulatory
interactions between two Antirrhinum MADS-box
factors controlling ﬂower development

Brendan Davies1, Patrick Motte2,3,
Emma Keck4, Heinz Saedler2,
Hans Sommer2 and
Zsuzsanna Schwarz-Sommer2

Leeds Institute for Plant Biotechnology and Agriculture,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, 4Department of Genetics,
John Innes Centre, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK and 2Max Planck Institut
fu¨r Zu¨chtungsforschung, Carl-von-Linne´ Weg 10, 50829 Ko¨ln,
Germany
3Present address: Department of Plant Biology, University of Lie`ge,
B-4000 Lie`ge, Belgium
1Corresponding author

We report the discovery of an Antirrhinum MADS-box
gene, FARINELLI (FAR), and the isolation of far
mutants by a reverse genetic screen. Despite striking
similarities between FAR and the class C MADS-box
gene PLENA (PLE), the phenotypes of their respective
mutants are dramatically different. Unlike ple mutants,
which show homeotic conversion of reproductive
organs
to perianth organs and a loss of ﬂoral
determinacy, far mutants have normal ﬂowers which
are partially male-sterile. Expression studies of PLE
and FAR, in wild-type and mutant backgrounds, show
complex interactions between the two genes. Double
mutant analysis reveals an unexpected, redundant
negative control over the B-function MADS-box genes.
This feature of the two Antirrhinum C-function-like
genes is markedly different from the control of the
inner boundary of the B-function expression domain
in Arabidopsis, and we propose and discuss a model
to account for these differences. The difference in
phenotypes of mutants in two highly related genes
illustrates the importance of the position within the
regulatory network in determining gene function.
Keywords: ﬂoral determinacy/homeotic mutants/MADS-
box/male sterility/regulatory network

Introduction
The study of Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis ﬂoral homeotic
mutants produced a simple combinatorial model to explain
how the regulated expression of a few genes could
determine the organ composition of the ﬂower (Coen
and Meyerowitz, 1991). The model proposes that three
functions are expressed in adjacent, overlapping whorls
such that the A-function is expressed in whorls 1 and 2,
the B-function in whorls 2 and 3, and the C-function in
whorls 3 and 4. Expression of the A-function alone
determines sepal development, co-expression of the A-
and B-functions or the B- and C-functions speciﬁes petals
or stamens, respectively, and expression of the C-function
alone results in carpel development. In B-function mutants,

reproductive organs.

petals and stamens are replaced by sepals and carpels,
In C-function mutants, perianth organs
respectively.
develop in place of
In both
Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis, a single C-function and two
B-function genes have been identiﬁed and shown to encode
MADS-box transcription factors (Sommer et al., 1990;
Yanofsky et al., 1990; Jack et al., 1992; Tro¨bner et al.,
1992; Bradley et al., 1993; Goto and Meyerowitz, 1994).
The MADS-box family is deﬁned by the presence of a
58 amino acid domain which is conserved between the
founding members; MCM1 (yeast), AGAMOUS and
DEFICIENS (plants) and SRF (animals) (Schwarz-Sommer
et al., 1990). Although MADS-box genes have been identi-
ﬁed and characterized in animals and yeasts (Shore and
Sharrocks, 1995), they are found most extensively in plants
(Theissen et al., 1996, Liljegren et al., 1998). The ⬎200
known plant MADS-factors, from many different species,
have been divided into sub-families based mainly on their
predicted amino acid sequences (Doyle, 1994; Purugganan
et al., 1995; Theissen et al., 1996). Often, genes from
different species which fall into one of these sub-families
have similar expression patterns and similar roles in
development. For example,
the B-function genes of
Antirrhinum [DEFICIENS (DEF) and GLOBOSA (GLO)]
and Arabidopsis [APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI)]
are expressed mainly in the second and third whorls and
show similar mutant phenotypes. Similarly, the C-function
genes of Antirrhinum [PLENA (PLE)] and Arabidopsis
[AGAMOUS (AG)] are expressed in the third and fourth
whorls and show similar mutant phenotypes. Currently
identiﬁed functions of the MADS-box gene family include
the control of organ identity (see above), ﬂowering time
(Sheldon et al., 1999), meristem identity (Huijser et al.,
1992; Mandel et al., 1992; Kempin et al., 1995), regulation
of ovule development (Angenent et al., 1995), regulation
of fruit development (Gu et al., 1998) and control of root
architecture (Zhang and Forde, 1998).

Here we report the isolation of a novel Antirrhinum
MADS-box gene, FARINELLI (FAR), and a recessive far
mutant. We show that all our current criteria identify FAR
as a second C-function gene. However, far mutants display
none of the typical features of C-function mutants and
instead show reduced male fertility. Furthermore, the ple/
far double mutant reveals that PLE and FAR act redundantly
to prevent expression of the B-function genes, DEF and
GLO, in the fourth whorl. We propose a model for the
interactions of PLE and FAR and show that two crucial
differences could account for the variation in single and
double
in
Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis.

homeotic mutant

phenotypes

observed

Results
IsolationofasecondAntirrhinumC-functiongene
To identify further members of the MADS-box gene
family, an Antirrhinum ﬂoral cDNA library was screened

© European Molecular Biology Organization

4023

