Moral Responsibility (Stanford Encyclopedia) 
First published Sat Jan 6, 2001; substantive revision Wed Mar 26, 2014 
 
When a person performs or fails to perform a morally significant action, we sometimes think 
that a particular kind of response is warranted. Praise and blame are perhaps the most obvious 
forms this reaction might take. For example, one who encounters a car accident may be 
regarded as worthy of praise for having saved a child from inside the burning car, or 
alternatively, one may be regarded as worthy of blame for not having used one's mobile phone 
to call for help. To regard such agents as worthy of one of these reactions is to regard them as 
responsible for what they have done or left undone. (These are examples of other-directed 
ascriptions of responsibility. The reaction might also be self-directed, e.g., one can recognize 
oneself to be blameworthy). Thus, to be morally responsible for something, say an action, is to 
be worthy of a particular kind of reaction—praise, blame, or something akin to these—for 
having performed it.[1] 
Though further elaboration and qualification of the above characterization of moral 
responsibility is called for and will be provided below, this is enough to distinguish concern 
about this form of responsibility from some others commonly referred to through use of the 
terms ‘responsibility’ or ‘responsible.’ To illustrate, we might say that higher than normal 
rainfall in the spring is responsible for an increase in the amount of vegetation or that it is the 
judge's responsibility to give instructions to the jury before they begin deliberating. In the first 
case, we mean to identify a causal connection between the earlier amount of rain and the later 
increased vegetation. In the second, we mean to say that when one assumes the role of judge, 
certain duties, or obligations, follow. Although these concepts are connected with the concept 
of moral responsibility discussed here, they are not the same, for in neither case are we directly 
concerned about whether it would be appropriate to react to some candidate (here, the rainfall 
or a particular judge) with something like praise or blame.[2] 
Philosophical reflection on moral responsibility has a long history. One reason for this persistent 
interest is the way the topic seems connected with our conception of ourselves as ‘persons.’[3] 
Many have held that one distinct feature of persons is their status as morally responsible agents, 
a status resting—some have proposed—on a special kind of control that only they can exercise. 
Many who view persons in this way have wondered whether their special status is threatened if 
certain other claims about our universe are true. For example, can a person be morally 
responsible for her behavior if that behavior can be explained solely by reference to physical 
states of the universe and the laws governing changes in those physical states, or solely by 
reference to the existence of a sovereign God who guides the world along a divinely ordained 
path? Concerns of this sort have often motivated reflection on moral responsibility. 
A comprehensive theory of moral responsibility would elucidate the following: (1) the concept, 
or idea, of moral responsibility itself; (2) the criteria for being a moral agent, i.e., one who 
qualifies generally as an agent open to responsibility ascriptions (e.g., only beings possessing the 

 

1 

