C H A P T E R   4

Emotional Liberty

The  concept  of  emotives  elaborated  in  Chapter  3,  developed  in
response to a range of problems encountered by researchers on emo-
tions, has broad implications for the understanding of social life and
politics. The present chapter offers a preliminary exploration of these
implications. They will be spelled out in greater detail in Part II, which
examines a speciﬁc period of political and social change.

the  political 

implications  of 

Researchers  on  emotions  in  ﬁelds  other  than  anthropology  have 
frequently  neglected 
their  work. 
Psychologists  have  had  very  little  to  say  on  this  issue.  Philosophers 
and  historians  who  have  written  on  emotions  in  recent  years  have 
often  expressed  only  tangential  interest  in  the  political  dimension  of
their  ideas  (e.g.,  Solomon  1984,  1992;  De  Sousa  1987).  Speech  act 
theorists  have,  for  the  most  part,  treated  their  subﬁeld  as  a  highly 
technical one, concerning language and intention, requiring no explo-
ration  of  political  issues.  A number  of  philosophers,  historians,  and 
literary  critics  concerned  with  gender  have  recognized  the  political
implications  of  the  West’s  gendered  conception  of  emotions  (e.g.,
Greenspan  1988;  Jaggar  1989;  DeJean  1991;  Schiesari  1992;  Burack 
1994;  Roper  1994;  Pinch  1996  –  in  addition  to  the  anthropologists 
mentioned in Chapter 2). But these observers have focused their atten-
tion too much on redressing this imbalance and too little on the larger
implications  of  the  whole  mental  ontology  their  work  has  put  into
question.

Anthropologists  represent  an  important  exception  to  the  general
aversion  to  politics  displayed  by  researchers  on  emotions.  But  their
work  has  been  hampered  by  fear  of  ethnocentrism  and  the  ongoing 
critique  of  the  culture  concept;  and,  as  a  result,  those  working  on 
emotions tend to split according to whether they wish to offer politi-

112

