D
N
A

L
A
C
I
G
O
L
O
H
C
Y
S
P

S
E
C
N
E
I
C
S

E
V
I
T
I
N
G
O
C

Eye movement evidence that readers maintain and
act on uncertainty about past linguistic input

Roger Levya,1, Klinton Bicknella, Tim Slatteryb, and Keith Raynerb

Departments of aLinguistics and bPsychology, University of California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093

Edited by Edward E. Smith, Columbia University, New York, NY, and approved October 20, 2009 (received for review July 14, 2009)

In prevailing approaches to human sentence comprehension, the
outcome of the word recognition process is assumed to be a
categorical representation with no residual uncertainty. Yet per-
ception is inevitably uncertain, and a system making optimal use of
available information might retain this uncertainty and interac-
tively recruit grammatical analysis and subsequent perceptual
input to help resolve it. To test for the possibility of such an
interaction, we tracked readers’ eye movements as they read
sentences constructed to vary in (i) whether an early word had near
neighbors of a different grammatical category, and (ii) how
strongly another word further downstream cohered grammatically
with these potential near neighbors. Eye movements indicated
that readers maintain uncertain beliefs about previously read word
identities, revise these beliefs on the basis of relative grammatical
consistency with subsequent input, and use these changing beliefs
to guide saccadic behavior in ways consistent with principles of
rational probabilistic inference.

psycholinguistics 兩 language comprehension 兩
probabilistic models of cognition

A critical part of understanding a sentence is identifying the

words that comprise it. It is well understood that humans
achieve this goal through a combination of top-down (contex-
tual) and bottom-up (perceptual) cues (1, 2). In spoken word
recognition, comprehenders’ conclusions about a given word’s
identity can be affected by phonetic and lexical cues from
adjacent words (3, 4), and by subsequent semantic context when
the speech stream is manipulated to make bottom-up evidence
ambiguous (5, 6). It has also recently become clear that even
relatively unambiguous bottom-up evidence regarding spoken
word identity can be overridden by subsequent evidence within
the same word (7, 8). It is unknown, however, whether word-
identity uncertainty is maintained as a matter of course after
perceptual cues have been encountered in full upon hearing or
first reading a word in a sentence. It could be that, under normal
circumstances, a categorical commitment is made to a unique
candidate word, which is then integrated into an incremental
sentence representation. Such a strategy could be efficient if
considerable effort is required to construct and maintain syn-
tactic/semantic relationships for multiple candidate words at a
given position within the sentence (9). This possibility also
coincides with the treatment of grammatical analysis in most
formal models of language comprehension as a process that
takes a word sequence as its input (10–12), and with the
treatment in leading models of eye-movement control in reading
(13, 14). On the other hand, it is also possible that the perceptual
input from a given word gives rise to multiple candidate word
representations entering the stream of syntactic/semantic pro-
cessing. This strategy would have the advantage of greater
robustness, permitting identification and correction of percep-
tual noise or speaker error early in a sentence on the basis of
additional
information obtained late in a sentence (15). In
addition, maintaining and continually reassessing uncertainty
about word identity could be useful in guiding behavior during
real-time comprehension. In reading, eye movements could be
directed to previous parts of a sentence where word-identity

uncertainty is high; in spoken language comprehension, alloca-
tion of attentional resources could be updated on the basis of
word uncertainty, or the listener could prompt the speaker for
clarification about parts of a message that were unclear. Whether
uncertainty about word identity is maintained and revised, and
if so, according to what principles, is thus a question of funda-
mental interest in the study of language comprehension.

A Sharp Test for Word-Level Uncertainty
In the past, providing a sharp test of whether word-identity
uncertainty is maintained has proven elusive because existing
results could be interpreted as involving categorical word mis-
identification. For example, the word flour is reread more often
in sentence 1a than in sentence 1b or than the word wheat in
sentence 1c (16):
1a. He swept the flour that he spilled.
1b. The baker needed more flour for the special bread.
1c. He swept the wheat that he spilled.
Crucially, the word flour has an orthographically similar ‘‘near-
neighbor,’’ floor, that is semantically incompatible with the
continuations of sentences 1a or 1c. The sentence-initial context
in sentence 1a is more strongly predictive of floor than of flour,
so it is possible that the distinctive rereading behavior is due to
the comprehender initially maintaining some uncertainty as to
whether the critical word was flour or floor, and subsequently
returning to this word to confirm that it is indeed flour. This same
result could, however, be obtained under a theory in which
uncertainty about word identity is not maintained after initial
word recognition, but there is an occasional categorical misiden-
tification of flour as floor in sentence 1a upon first reading, and
the incongruous downstream word spilled triggers a return of the
eyes to the initial locus of semantic anomaly.

In the present work, we provide a sharper test of whether
word-identity uncertainty is maintained by using sentences in
which categorical misidentification should in principle facilitate,
rather than hinder, downstream processing. We turn to sentences
with a combination of grammatical constructions that has at-
tracted considerable recent attention for the theoretically prob-
lematic comprehension behavior it elicits. Despite near meaning
equivalence, sentence 2a is considerably more difficult to read
and comprehend than sentences 2b and 2c (17–19):
2a. The coach smiled at the player tossed the frisbee.
2b. The coach smiled at the player thrown the frisbee.
2c. The coach smiled at the player who was tossed the frisbee.

Author contributions: R.L., K.B., T.S., and K.R. designed research; R.L., K.B., and T.S.
performed research; R.L., T.S., and K.R. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; R.L., K.B.,
T.S., and K.R. analyzed data; and R.L. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: rlevy@ling.ucsd.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/
0907664106/DCSupplemental.

www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0907664106

PNAS Early Edition 兩 1 of 5

