|

|

䡬

Articles

Structure and Example in Modular
Political Phenomena: The Diffusion of
Bulldozer/Rose/Orange/Tulip Revolutions

Mark R. Beissinger

The article develops an approach to the study of modular political phenomena (action based in signiﬁcant part on emulation of the
prior successful example of others), focusing on the trade-offs between the inﬂuence of example, structural facilitation, and insti-
tutional constraints. The approach is illustrated through the example of the spread of democratic revolution in the post-communist
region during the 2000–2006 period, with signiﬁcant comparisons to the diffusion of separatist nationalism in the Soviet Union
during the glasnost’ era. Two models by which modular processes unfold are speciﬁed: an elite defection model and an elite learning
model. In both models the power of example is shown to exert an independent effect on outcomes, although the effect is consider-
ably deeper in the former than in the latter case. The elite defection model corresponds to the institutional responses to separatist
nationalism under glasnost’, while the elite learning model describes well the processes involved in the spread modular democratic
revolution among later risers in the post-communist region, limiting the likelihood of further revolutionary successes. The article
concludes with some thoughts about the implications of the power of example for the study of modular phenomena such as democ-
ratization, nationalism, and revolution.

S ince 2000, four successful revolutions have occurred

in the post-communist region, each overthrowing
regimes practicing fraudulent elections and bring-
ing to power new coalitions in the name of democratiza-
tion. These successful revolutions have inspired democratic
oppositions throughout the post-Soviet states toward emu-
lation, and democratic revolution has come to the center
of attention within the American government and
democracy-promoting NGOs as a strategy for democra-
tization. Like European monarchs after 1848, post-
Soviet strongmen have grown tremendously concerned
about the transnational spread of revolution. Most have
already taken countermeasures to stave off such a possi-
bility. Thus, post-Soviet Eurasia has become a region con-
sumed by the hope, fear, and aftermath of modular
revolutionary change.

Mark R. Beissinger is Professor of Politics, Princeton Uni-
versity (mbeissin@princeton.edu). The author is grateful to
the School of Social Science at the Institute for Advanced
Study at Princeton, the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin, and
the University of Wisconsin-Madison for the opportunity to
pursue research for this essay. He would also like to thank
Nancy Bermeo, Valerie Bunce, Atul Kohli, Jon Pevehouse,
Grigore Pop-Eleches, Edward Schatz, Jack Snyder, Al
Stepan, Joshua Tucker, and two anonymous reviewers for
their feedback on an earlier version of this article.

I use the term “modular” in the way in which Tarrow
used the term to describe the spread of collective action
across groups.1 Modular action is action that is based in
signiﬁcant part on the prior successful example of
others—a model being, in one of Webster’s deﬁnitions,
“an example for imitation or emulation.” Modular phe-
nomena like the democratic revolutions that have occurred
among the post-communist states present a challenge for
social science theorizing, because the cross-case inﬂu-
ences that in part drive their spread violate the assump-
tion of the independence of cases that lies at the basis of
much social scientiﬁc analysis—both analyses based on
the Millian method, as well as those statistical analyses
that rely on the assumption that the result of each throw
of the political dice is independent of the results of prior
throws. In social science the problem of cross-case inﬂu-
ences is sometimes known as “Galton’s problem,” named
after Sir Francis Galton, who in 1889 criticized an analy-
sis of Edward Tylor that claimed to show correlations
between economic and familial institutions in a wide
variety of societies and explained them from a function-
alist standpoint. Galton questioned whether these cus-
toms were independent of one another, speculating that
they may have ultimately derived from an earlier com-
mon source. Modular phenomena based in the conscious
emulation of prior successful example constitute only one
form of cross-case inﬂuence; spillover effects, herding
behavior, path-dependence, and reputational effects are

DOI: 10.1017/S1537592707070776

June 2007 | Vol. 5/No. 2 259

䡬

䡬

