Mary Ann Glendon contends that the language of "rights" has so invaded the public scene that
creative political discussion has become almost impossible.  Ms. Glendon is a Professor of Law
at Harvard University; her Rights Talk: The Impoverishment of Political Discourse, © by Mary
Ann Glendon, was just published by The Free Press, New York, a division of Macmillan, Inc.
In lieu of a review we present the preface from her book.

RIGHTS TALK: THE IMPOVERISHMENT
OF POLITICAL DISCOURSE
By Mary Ann Glendon

In the spring of 1990, men and women in East
Germany and Hungary participated in the first fully
free elections that had taken place in any of the East
European countries since they came under Soviet
control in 1945. Excitement ran high. The last
people to have voted in that part of the world were
now in their seventies. Some young parents, casting
their ballot for the first time, brought their children
with them to see the sight. Many, no doubt, will
long remember the day as one marked with both
festivity and solemnity. Meanwhile, in the United
States, public interest in politics appears to be at an
all-time low. Two months before the 1988
presidential election, polls revealed that half the
voting-age public did not know the identity of the
Democratic vice-presidential candidate and could
not say which party had a majority in Congress.1 In
that election, only half the eligible voters cast
ballots, thirteen percent less than in 1960.
Americans not only vote less that citizens of other
liberal democracies, they display a remarkable
degree of apathy concerning public affairs. Over a
period of twenty years, daily newspaper readership
has fallen from seventy-three percent of adults to a
mere fifty-one percent.2 Nor have the readers simply
become viewers, for ratings of network evening
news programs have dropped by  about twenty-five
percent in the past ten years, and the slack has not
been taken up by cable television news. Cynicism,
indifference, and ignorance concerning government
appear to be pervasive. By all outward indicators,
the right and obligation to vote — a subject of
wonder to East Europeans, and the central concern
of many of us who worked in the civil rights
movement of the 1960s — is now held here in rather
low esteem.

Poor voter turnouts in the United States are, of

course, mere symptoms of deeper problems, not
least of which are the decline of broadly
representative political parties, and the effect of the
"sound-bite" on serious and sustained political
discussion. On this deeper level lies the
phenomenon with which this book is concerned: the
impoverishment of our political discourse. Across
the political spectrum there is a growing realization
that it has become increasingly difficult even to

define critical questions, let alone debate and resolve
them.

Though sound-bites do not permit much airing

of issues, they seem tailor-made for our strident
language of rights. Rights talk itself is relatively
impervious to the other more complex languages we
still speak in less public contexts, but it seeps into
them, carrying the rights mentality into spheres of
American society where a sense of personal
responsibility and of civic obligation traditionally
have been nourished. An intemperate rhetoric of
personal liberty in this way corrodes the social
foundations on which individual freedom and
security ultimately rest. While the nations of Eastern
Europe are taking their first risk-laden and faltering
steps toward democracy, the historic American
experiment in ordered liberty is thus undergoing a
less dramatic, but equally fateful, crisis of its own. It
is a crisis at the very heart of the American
experiment in self-government, for it concerns the
state of public deliberation about the right ordering
of our lives together. In the home of free speech,
genuine exchange of ideas about matters of high
public importance has come to a virtual standstill.

This book argues that the prominence of a

certain kind of rights talk in our political discussions
is both a symptom of, and a contributing factor to,
this disorder of the body politic. Discourse about
rights has become the principal language that we use
in public settings to discuss weighty questions of
both right and wrong, but time and again it proves
inadequate, or leads to a standoff of one right
against another. The problem is not, however, as
some contend, with the very notion of rights, or with
our strong rights tradition. It is with a new version
of rights discourse that has achieved dominance over
the past thirty years.

Our current American rights talk is but one

dialect in a universal language that has developed
during the extraordinary era of attention to civil and
human rights in the wake of World War II. It is set
apart from rights discourse in other liberal
democracies by its starkness and simplicity, its
prodigality in bestowing the rights label, its
legalistic character, its exaggerated absoluteness, its
hyperindividualism, its insularity, and its silence

The Social Contract

62

Fall 1991

