P E R S P E C T I V E

Leadership for 

Quality and Innovation: 
Challenges, Theories, and a 
Framework for Future Research

JOHN R. LATHAM, UNIVERSITY OF NORTHERN COLORADO

© 2014, ASQ

This  perspective  paper  discusses  current  issues  facing 
leaders,  what  researchers  and  practitioners  know 
about  leadership  theory  and  practice,  and  what  they 
need  to  know  to  improve  leadership  in  the  future. 
A  key  issue  in  leadership  research  is  that  there  has 
been  no  convergence  toward  a  reasonable  number 
of  cogent  leadership  theories.  The  current  knowledge 
about  leadership  consists  of  narrow  definitions  of 
leader  effectiveness  that  are  disconnected  from  their 
context, so the application to practice is difficult. More 
research  is  needed  that  develops  leadership  frame-
works  and  models  that  integrate  transformational, 
servant, and spiritual leadership theories and include 
the context and a definition of success based on cre-
ating  value  for  multiple  stakeholders.  A  framework 
for  future  leadership  research  is  proposed  along  with 
a “call to action.”

Key  words:  ambidextrous  organization,  diversity, 
innovation,  leadership  failures,  leadership  theories, 
quality,  servant  leadership,  spiritual  leadership, 
stakeholders, sustainability, transactional leadership, 
transformational leadership

INTRODUCTION

Leadership continues to be a popular topic for quality 
professionals, organizational leaders, researchers, con-
sultants, and a variety of commentators. Unfortunately, 
there are numerous examples of leadership failures, 
ranging  from  ethical  disasters  to  the  workers  who 
hate their boss and their job. Both reduce individual 
engagement and reduce organizational performance. 
However, after years of practicing and researching lead-
ership, there is still no reasonable number of cogent 
and  coherent  theories  for  leaders  to  follow  that  will 
predict  success.  To  make  matters  worse,  the  task  of 
leadership  at  all  organizational  levels  seems  to  be 
getting  more  and  more  difficult.  Perhaps  too  much 
credit for organizational success and failure is given 
to leaders, but there is consensus among scholars and 
practitioners  that  it  is  important  and  it  does  make 
a  difference.  W.  Edwards  Deming  understood  the 
importance of leaders using their influence to improve 
quality by attending training sessions on quality princi-
ples and practices. Deming even walked out when some 
executives refused to attend their company’s training.

LEADERSHIP IS 
INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT

The number and type of stakeholders exerting pressure 
on organizations has increased from a narrow focus on 
investors and customers and now includes stakeholders 

www.asq.org 11

