Neuropsychologia 42 (2004) 707–712

Rapid publication

Haptic face recognition and prosopagnosia

Andrea R. Kilgour a,∗

, Beatrice de Gelder b, Susan J. Lederman c
a Department of Clinical Health Psychology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man., Canada R3E 3N4

b Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory and FC Donders Center for Cognitive Brain Imaging, Tilburg University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

c Department of Psychology, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ont., Canada K7L 3N6

Received 23 October 2002; received in revised form 28 January 2003; accepted 7 November 2003

Abstract

Cases of cross-modal inﬂuence have been observed since the beginning of psychological science. Yet some abilities like face recogni-
tion are traditionally only investigated in the visual domain. People with normal visual face-recognition capacities identify inverted faces
more poorly than upright faces. An abnormal pattern of performance with inverted faces by prosopagnosic individuals is characteristi-
cally interpreted as evidence for a deﬁcit in conﬁgural processing essential for normal face recognition. We investigated whether such
problems are unique to vision by examining face processing by hand in a prosopagnosic individual. We used the haptic equivalent of the
visual-inversion paradigm to investigate haptic face recognition. If face processing is speciﬁc to vision, our participant should not show
difﬁculty processing faces haptically and should perform with the same ease as normal controls. Instead, we show that a prosopagnosic
individual cannot haptically recognize faces. Moreover, he shows similar abnormal inversion effects by hand and eye. These results suggest
that face-processing deﬁcits can be found across different input modalities. Our ﬁndings also extend the notion of conﬁgural processing to
haptic face and object recognition.
© 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Touch; Face-inversion effect; Multisensory

1. Introduction

Cases of cross-modal inﬂuence have been noted since
the beginning of psychological science. In 1839, Brewster
reported that observers who saw indented objects (e.g.,
engraved seals) through an optical device that inverted ap-
parent concavity, also experienced a haptic inversion effect
when they explored these objects simultaneously by touch
(Brewster, 1839). The corresponding question—is failure
to recognize what one sees also associated with a failure
to recognize what one touches—has rarely been raised.
In light of the ongoing debate on face speciﬁcity and the
importance of prosopagnosia to this discussion, it appears
highly relevant to ask whether a deﬁcit in face recogni-
tion by vision might be associated with a deﬁcit in face
recognition by touch (i.e., the haptic system).

Neurologically intact individuals process faces more by
their overall conﬁguration than by their local features (de
Gelder & Rouw, 2000a; Freire, Lee, & Symons, 2000).
To investigate this conﬁgural or holistic (Tanaka & Farah,
1993) recognition strategy, researchers have predominantly

∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-204-787-5187; fax: +1-204-787-3755.
E-mail address: akilgour@exchange.hsc.mb.ca (A.R. Kilgour).

0028-3932/$ – see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2003.11.021

used the inversion effect, which is deﬁned as a decrease in
performance when recognizing inverted as oppose to up-
right faces (Valentine, 1988; Yin, 1969). Results that show
a relatively stronger inversion effect for faces than for other
mono-oriented objects have also been interpreted as evi-
dence that faces occupy a special status (Diamond & Carey,
1986) among visually apprehended objects. This weaker in-
version effect for non-face objects is presumably due to
recognition that is more strongly based on features and less
disrupted by inversion (Leder & Bruce, 2000).

for

faces

The inversion effect plays an important role in understand-
ing the visual deﬁcits of patients with a category-speciﬁc
recognition deﬁcit
(prosopagnosia). Some
prosopagnosic individuals do not demonstrate the typical
inversion effect, while others process inverted faces bet-
ter than upright faces (de Gelder & Rouw, 2000b; Farah,
Wilson, Drain, & Tanaka, 1998). The paradoxical inversion
effect (de Gelder & Rouw, 2000b) indicates that conﬁgural
processing is disrupted but not totally absent. When the need
for conﬁgural processing is removed (by inverting the face),
a feature-based analysis can be performed more easily.

Previous studies have been conﬁned to investigating face
recognition and its deﬁcits in the visual modality only. Yet
there is no intrinsic link between vision and face recognition

