Clinical Psychology Review 27 (2007) 425 – 457

Suspicious minds: The psychology of persecutory delusions

Daniel Freeman

Department of Psychology, PO Box 77, Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, Denmark Hill, London, SE5 8AF, UK

Received 6 July 2006; accepted 10 October 2006

Abstract

At least 10–15% of the general population regularly experience paranoid thoughts and persecutory delusions are a frequent
symptom of psychosis. Persecutory ideation is a key topic for study. In this article the empirical literature on psychological
processes associated with persecutory thinking in clinical and non-clinical populations is comprehensively reviewed. There is a
large direct affective contribution to the experience. In particular, anxiety affects the content, distress and persistence of paranoia. In
the majority of cases paranoia does not serve a defensive function, but instead builds on interpersonal concerns conscious to the
person. However, affect alone is not sufficient to produce paranoid experiences. There is also evidence that anomalous internal
experiences may be important in leading to odd thought content and that a jumping to conclusions reasoning bias is present in
individuals with persecutory delusions. Theory of mind functioning has received particular research attention recently but the
findings do not support a specific association with paranoia. The threat anticipation cognitive model of persecutory delusions is
presented, in which persecutory delusions are hypothesised to arise from an interaction of emotional processes, anomalous
experiences and reasoning biases. Ten key future research questions are identified, including the need for researchers to consider
factors important to the different dimensions of delusional experience.
© 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Delusions; Paranoia; Cognitive; Schizophrenia; Psychosis

1. Introduction

We are living in paranoid times, with fears of others attaining a new intensity. Nonetheless, being overly wary of the
intentions of others has long been recognised as a problem. In the seventeenth century Francis Bacon (1612), often
credited as the founder of the scientific method, commented on the corrosive nature of the experience: ‘Suspicions
amongst thoughts are like bats amongst birds, — they ever fly by twilight. Certainly they are to be repressed, or, at the
least, well guarded. For they cloud the mind, they lose friends, and they check with business, whereby business cannot
go on currently and constantly. They dispose kings to tyranny, husbands to jealousy, wise men to irresolution and
melancholy.’

Yet in the last 10 years there has been a rapid development in the understanding of persecutory thinking, assisted by
the focus on it as a phenomenon of interest in its own right rather than simply as a symptom of severe mental illness
(Bentall, 1990). The argument that will be put forward in this review is that there is now an excellent opportunity to

E-mail address: D.Freeman@iop.kcl.ac.uk.

0272-7358/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2006.10.004

