Page 1

*646 Re D'Jan of London Ltd

Chancery Division (Companies Court)

17 June 1993

[1993] B.C.C. 646

Hoffmann LJ (sitting as an additional judge of the Chancery Division)

Judgment delivered 17 June 1993

Winding up—Summary remedy against delinquent directors etc.—Whether director was negligent in
signing insurance proposal—Materiality of director's 99 per cent ownership of company—Whether
director had acted honestly and reasonably and ought
fairly to be excused for negligence—
Companies Act 1985, sec. 727 ; Insolvency Act 1986, sec. 212 .

This was a summons by a liquidator under sec. 212 of the Insolvency Act 1986 against “D”, a
former officer of
the company. The company was insolvent with a deficiency as regards
unsecured creditors of about £500,000. D held 99 of the 100 issued ordinary shares in the
company, and his wife the other. He had proved as an unsecured creditor in the sum of £102,913
and had been paid an interim dividend of 40p in the pound. The liquidator had paid a further
dividend of 20p but withheld payment to D pending the resolution of the proceedings.

The liquidator's summons alleged that D was negligent in completing and signing a proposal form
for fire insurance, with the result that the insurers repudiated liability for a fire at the company's
premises in which stock said to be worth some £174,000 was destroyed. D accepted that the
wrong answer was given on the form, entitling the insurers to repudiate. His evidence was that he
did not fill in the form himself or read it before he signed.

Held , declaring that D was liable to compensate the company for the loss caused by his breach
of duty in an amount not exceeding any unpaid dividends to which he would otherwise be entitled
as an unsecured creditor:

1 In failing even to read the form, D was negligent. Signing forms without reading them was
something a busy director might do, but that did not mean that it was not negligent. A director did
not always have to read the whole of every document which he signed, but the proposal form
was an extremely simple document asking a few questions which D was the best person to
answer. By signing the form, he accepted that he was the person who should take responsibility
for its contents.

2 The duty of care owed by a director at common law was accurately stated in sec. 214(4) of the
Insolvency Act 1986 . Both on the objective test and on the subjective test, D did not show
reasonable diligence when he signed the form. He was therefore in breach of his duty to the
company.

3 It was no defence to argue that D and his wife as shareholders would probably have ratified D's
action if they had known or thought about it before the liquidation removed their power to do so.

4 Although for the purposes of the law of negligence the company was a separate entity to which
D owed a duty of care which did not vary according to the number of shares he owned, the
economic reality of his 99 per cent shareholding could be taken into account in exercising the
court's discretionary power under sec. 727 of the Companies Act 1985 to relieve a director from
liability. His breach of duty in failing to read the form before signing was not gross. It was the kind
of thing which could happen to any busy man. At that time the company was solvent and the only
persons whose interests he was foreseeably putting at risk by not reading the form were himself
and his wife. D certainly acted honestly. For the purposes of sec. 727 he acted reasonably and
he ought fairly to be excused for some, though not all, of the liability which he would otherwise
have incurred.

*647

The following case was referred to in the judgment:

