Student: Juan Pablo Fagiani 
Dozent: Prof. Dr. Armin Schäfer 
Seminar: Demokratie und Kapitalismus: Perspektiven 
auf ein widersprüchliches Verhältnis 
WS 2014/15 
 

 

Wolfgang Streeck – The crisis of democratic capitalism (2011) 

 

“A decent, ethical society would pay only marginal attention to profits” 
(Noam Chomsky1) 
 
 
The  whole  literature  on  the  relationship  between  free  markets  and  free  democratic  societies  can  by 
analyzed  from  two  different  perspectives.  One  of  those  asserts  that  there  is  a  tension  between  the 
concepts of capitalism and democracy, and it can be divided between liberals and left authors. Among the 
latter, Streeck explains how it is not possible for governments to simultaneously abide by the principles 
that guide democratic societies and free markets, even though those governments commited to. Mainly, 
the  author  poses  the  question  ‘What  are  the  conflicting  principles  that  makes  disequilibrium  and 
instability  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception  of  the  advanced  capitalist  economies?  And,  based  on  this 
intrinsic conflict, how can the financial crisis that started in 2008 be explained?  

 

The  main  argument  of  Streeck  (2010)  is  that  advanced-capitalist  societies  enhance  a  constant  conflict 
between  two  principles.  On  the  one  hand,  marginal  productivity,  as  evaluated  by  the  workings  of  free 
markets. On the other hand, social rights or entitlements, regarding the collective choices of democratic 
policies. The attempts of the government to fulfill simultaneously both principles is impossible since both 
of  them  almost  never  align  –  it  is  virtually  a  dog  chasing  his  own  tail.  “Good  economic  policy  is  non-
political  by  definition”  (Op.  cit.:  10).Moreover,  an  essential  claim  of  Streeck’s  statement  is  that  this 
conflict is to be analyzed within democratic capitalism. 

According to this author’s posture, during the 19th and almost the first half of the 20th century there was 
evidence that capitalism and democracy ‘may not sit easily together’2. However, after the Second World 
War, it was widely agreed that, for capitalism to be in accordance with democracy, the former would have 
to be subjected to extensive political control. Thus, democracy would be protected from being inhibited 
by the free play of market forces. Streeck (2011) refers to this societal model ‘democratic capitalism’ and 
its  hard-core  enhances  the  tension  of  both  principles  named  above.  Based  on  a  non-alignment  of  the 

                                                           
1  Source:  “Democracy’s  invisible  line”,  Le  Monde  Diplomatique,  August  2nd  2008.  Available  online  at: 
http://mondediplo.com/2007/08/02democracy  
2 Such tension was manifested in the different perspectives and goals a) the bourgeoisie and the political Right 
and b) the rising working class and the political Left were striving for. On the one hand, the fear of the majority 
rule could hinder private property and the play of free market forces by the formers. On the other hand, the 
concern  that  capitalist  will  make  a  collision  to  avoid  democracy  in  order  to  be  governed  by  a  majority  that 
strives for social and economic redistribution (Streeck 2011). 

Essay – Wolfgang Streeck – The crisis of democratic capitalism (2011) 

  1 

