Frequently Asked Questions for Language Skills Classes (Jones) 

Consultation 

Can I talk to you before or after class? I will try to answer quick questions before or after class. It is often not 
possible to deal with multiple or more complex questions, though, because I frequently have to teach another 
class directly before or after our session together. This involves picking up materials, making copies at a time 
when  the  copier  is  free,  and  setting  up  technical  equipment,  so  I  often  have  to  rush.  Please  don’t 
misunderstand this as unwillingness to speak to you.  

Does it really have to be your office hour? Since students sometimes come to my classes late or leave early in 
order to visit the office hours of other teachers, I consider it equally realistic to ask you do the same to visit 
mine. If, however, you have a valid reason for not being able to see me during my office hour, I will endeavour 
to  make  an  alternative  appointment.  This  does  not  always  work  out  due  to  the  classes  I  teach,  faculty 
meetings, etc, so wherever possible, please use the office hour.   

If there is a queue, will you still see me after the official end of the office hour? As long as I don’t have an 
urgent appointment after my office hour finishes, yes. 

Will  there  be  office  hours  during  the  semester  break?  Yes,  but  not  every  week  and  not  necessarily  at  the 
same times. Check the announcements on the IfAA Stud-IP for my office hours during the semester break. Also 
see my email signature. 

Recognition of Courses 

Can  I  have  the  course  that  I  am  registered  in  recognised  for  [insert  course  of  study  /  module  here]?  Any 
questions about this should be directed to our coordinator of studies, Mr Brinkmann (rbrinkmann@uos.de). 

 

Moodle 

Do we need to do the tasks on Moodle? You need to do an absolute minimum of 80% of all online tasks on Moodle 
in  IELP  I  and  II  and  AELP  Speaking.  This  counts  as  basic  course  participation  and  you  cannot  pass  the  course  without 
having done at least 80% of them. 

What is the access password for my course on Moodle? Your teacher gave you this password in the first class 
session. It is also in the course plan document for IELP and AELP courses, which you will find on the courses’ 
Stud-IP pages. 

Whom should I contact with questions about or problems with Moodle? During the semester: Juliane Busch 
(julbusch@uos.de).  During  the  semester  break:  Mr.  Bonk  (jbonk@uos.de).  You  can  also  write  to  the  “IFAA 
Support" account on Moodle. 

I have a technical problem with Moodle. What should I do? Contact the email addresses above. Do not ignore the 
problem and hope for the best. 

I didn't do the tasks on Moodle in time. Can you put the quiz online again? By re-activating the quizzes, your 
fellow students will no longer be able to see the solutions and check their work Therefore, we will not be able to do that 
as it would deprive your classmates who completed the tasks on time of the chance to learn from them. Plan ahead using 
reminders on your mobile / email program. 

 

