PRECÍS OF SIMPLE HEURISTICS THAT 

MAKE US SMART – AN ABSTRACT 

In their detailed summary paper, published 2000 in the behavioural and brain science magazine, about 

the well-cited (4023 citations until Nov14) book Simple Heuristics that make us smart, Peter M. Todd and 

Gerd Gigerenzer challenge the popular complex reasoning mechanisms like Expected Utility Maximization 

or Multiple Regression by stating the claim that simple heuristics, from now on especially called fast & 

frugal heuristics, can outperform them in terms of complexity, time and computation effort and even 

accuracy. 

In Cognitive Science, Economics and Animal Behaviour Studies modelling (human / animal / artificial 

intelligence) reasoning and decision making requires a number of assumptions, from which one of the 

most assumed is being unconstrained. Limitless knowledge, endless time and supernatural reasoning 

powers are taken for granted to manifest the various theories of reasoning. This, obviously, is far from 

reality, does not deliver a sufficient explanation of human reasoning and neither serves to develop 

artificially intelligent inference machines. The authors thus suggest to keep reasoning in the most 

simplistic form, in their notation fast & frugal heuristics. 

A very descriptive example mentioned in the paper is the decision of a medic on the risk level of an 

incoming patient, resulting in a binary solution: “High risk patient” or “Low risk patient”. Since there is a 

vast number of parameters able to measure from the patient, time is really pressing in this possibly life-

threatening situation and the computational potential of a stressed medic is also very constrained, one 

solution to this problem would be a complex reasoner which has a huge dataset of many parameters and 

entries and tries to make an estimated guess about the risk. Another solution but, to use only a few 

number of most informative cues and decide from them heuristically. So is the blood pressure level the 

most important cue and can decide on its own under certain conditions whether the patient is a high risk 

patient, disregarding every other parameter. Adding age and the information whether there is sinus 

tachycardia present in the patient, one gets a (at most) 3-step heuristic which is far less complex and 

therefore faster and computationally cheaper without losing accuracy. 

Todd and Gigerenzer discuss about various types of rationality that arose in the human history, but 

defend humanity by stating that “biases” in examples like the Wason Selection Task or Kahneman & 

Tverskys famous experiments do not show that humans are irrational, but that they are not using logics or 

mathematics to use the most tasks in their life, but heuristics. 

They also present some classes of their theoretical heuristics, show how to implement them, compare 

them to today’s standard complex methods and evaluate, whether humans actually use them. 

Lastly, they introduce their concept of the adaptive toolbox, for which more information are held in Gerd 

Gigerenzers “Bounded Rationality: The adaptive Toolbox”, that serves as a framework for human 

reasoning explained in heuristics using lower- and higher-order cognitive functions, as well as other 

heuristics. 

