Minutes
Seminar: Introduction to English Language Teaching 
Lecturer: Prof. Dr. phil. Dirk Siepmann 
Student: Rebecca Mey  (956416)
Date: 26/04/2016 
Topic of the session: Second Language Acquisition and Methodology 

At the beginning of the session Prof. Siepmann introduced the topic of the session. He said that
after having thought about first language acquisition we would now go over to second language
acquisition and methodology. Prof. Siepmann asked us to explain the difference between late
second language learners and early second language learners. We figured out that little children are
learning languages more intentionally. Seven year olds and adults know how to write and read, they
are literated. So, if both languages are taught at the same time, there may be interferences.
Yet, as Prof. Siepmann explained, there is a more serious problem for literated people who are
learning a second language. 
To discuss this problem we came back to Chomsky and his theories of language acquisition.
Chomsky developed an own theory of an account of linguistic knowledge. He said that linguistic
knowledge consists of a store of individual words and morphemes as well as rules to assemble
them.   Due   to  this   linguistic   knowledge   we   would   produce   a   sentence   like   “The  captain   has
illuminated the seat belt sign as an indication that landing is imminent”. However, we would never
say something like this. Instead, the sentence “The seat belt sign is on, we're about to land” makes
more sense. This sentence is produced due to an linguistic knowledge of a store of different sizes.
It's about learning language on segmentation and a principle called principle of least effort.
Prof. Siepmann explained this principle to us with the example of the phrase “gimme some”. A
child who has successfully uttered the sentence “gimme some pizza”  will use the phrase again to
get e.g. some juice: “Gimme some juice!”. The child learns that there is a phrase like “gimme
some” which is variably used. 
After that, Prof. Siepmann explained the connection between the principle of least effort and second
language acquisition. He asked the students why L2 learners end up with a different knowledge than
L1 learners even if both groups learn the language at school. First of all it was established that L2
learners learn the second language through written texts. Moreover, the language learning process is
influenced by the vocabulary section of their textbook and the methodology of the second language
teacher. L2 learners learn the second language in words and not in phrases like L1 learners would
normally do (principle of least effort). Non native speakers are putting words together rather than
using constructions. This is a big problem as L2 learners end up with a different knowledge than L1

