Biodivers Conserv
DOI 10.1007/s10531-010-9957-z

O R I G I N A L P A P E R

Monitoring population and gene pool dynamics
of the annual species Capsella bursa-pastoris
(Brassicaceae): a review of relevant species traits
and the initiation of a long-term genetic monitoring
programme

Barbara Neuffer • Karl-Georg Bernhardt • Herbert Hurka •
Matthias Kropf

Received: 27 August 2009 / Accepted: 22 November 2010
Ó Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

Abstract Species that colonise habitats on an annual basis are important for studying and
understanding evolutionary changes and adaptations in the course of environmental shifts,
caused, for instance, by global change phenomena. These species are characterised by a
weedy ecology enabling them to react fast to environmental changes. As a model species,
we selected Capsella bursa-pastoris (Brassicaceae, Shepherd’s Purse), which is annual to
biennial, predominantly selﬁng and closely related to the genetic model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. Differentiation and adaptation in C. bursa-pastoris are shortly reviewed. Based
on this knowledge, two Botanical Gardens are currently arranging long-term sites char-
acterised by annual ploughing for the genetic monitoring of C. bursa-pastoris. Demo-
graphic parameters will be monitored as well, i.e. different life-cycle phases such as
ﬂowering, fruiting, and the soil seed bank. Furthermore, seeds of at least 20 individuals
will be sampled per year. Isozyme analyses, ﬂow cytometry, AFLPs, SNPs as well as
microsatellites will be utilised to characterise changes in genetic diversity patterns over
time. In general, the objective of our genetic monitoring of C. bursa-pastoris is to address
the following questions: In the light of future research, our objectives are to study whether
the genetic structure and diversity of C. bursa-pastoris alter over time, whether a possible
invasion of ecotypes/genotypes of Sheperd’s purse is traceable using genetic markers, and
whether it is possible to relate variation in reproductive patterns to respective candidate
genes, which may be useful for monitoring.

B. Neuffer  H. Hurka
Institute of Botany, University of Osnabrueck, Barbarastr. 11, 49076 Osnabrueck, Germany

K.-G. Bernhardt (&)
Institute of Botany, University of Natural Resources and Applied Life Sciences,
Gregor Mendel-Str. 33, 1180 Vienna, Austria
e-mail: karl-georg.bernhardt@boku.ac.at

M. Kropf
Institute of Integrative Nature Conservation Research, University of Natural Resources and Applied
Life Sciences, Gregor Mendel-Str. 33, 1180 Vienna, Austria

123

