Review

TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.11 No.8 August 2003

359

Making informed decisions: regulatory
interactions between two-component
systems

Jetta J.E. Bijlsma and Eduardo A. Groisman

Department of Molecular Microbiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Washington University School of Medicine,
Campus Box 8230, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA

Bacteria experience a multitude of stresses in the com-
plex niches they inhabit. These stresses are denoted by
speciﬁc signals that typically alter the activity of individ-
ual two-component regulatory systems. Processing of
multiple signals by different two-component systems
occurs when multiple sensors interact with a single
response regulator, by phosphatases interrupting phos-
phoryl transfer in phosphorelays and through transcrip-
tional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. Gaining
insight into these mechanisms provides an understand-
ing at the molecular level of bacterial adaptation to ever
changing multifaceted environments.

phosphorylate from small molecular weight phosphoryl
donors, such as acetyl phosphate and carbamoyl phos-
phate [3,4]. In addition, the vast majority of sensor kinases
exhibit phosphatase activity towards their
cognate
response regulators. Although most two-component sys-
tems entail a single His-to-Asp phosphotransfer event
between a histidine kinase and a response regulator, there
is a subset that consists of a three-step His-Asp-His-Asp
phosphorelay (Fig. 1b) [1,2]. The extra phosphorylatable
domains in a phosphorelay can be present in separate
proteins or be part of multi-domain (i.e. hybrid) sensor
proteins, which, in either case, will ultimately donate the

A crucial question in signal transduction is: how does an
organism integrate multiple inputs into the most appro-
priate action? Most of the present knowledge on bacterial
gene regulation is based on studies conducted in labora-
tory settings, where conditions are carefully controlled
and, typically, only one stress is applied at a time.
Although this reductionist approach has been successful
in elucidating several regulatory mechanisms, it does not
take into consideration the multitude of simultaneous
stresses that bacteria experience in the niches they
occupy. We are now beginning to uncover how bacteria
adjust their behavior in response to multiple cues from
complex environments.

Bacteria sense environmental conditions using a
variety of systems, which include secondary metabolites
and ions, such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate and
Fe2þ
, and regulatory proteins, such as catabolite regulat-
ory protein (CRP) and ferric uptake regulator (Fur), whose
afﬁnity for DNA changes on ligand binding. However, two-
component systems are the predominant form of signal
transduction used by bacteria to respond to environmental
stresses [1,2]. Two-component systems usually consist of a
sensor protein (or histidine kinase) and a cognate response
regulator. Sensor proteins use adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) to autophosphorylate at a conserved histidine
residue, often in response to a speciﬁc signal. The high-
energy phosphoryl group is then transferred to a con-
served aspartate residue in the response regulator, often
altering its ability to bind target DNA sequences (Fig. 1a)
[1,2]. Certain response regulators have the ability to

Corresponding author: Eduardo A. Groisman (groisman@borcim.wustl.edu).

(a)

Sensor

Sensing
domain

Kinase
domain

P+

Response regulator

Receiver
domain

Regulatory

domain

ATP

ADP

(b)

ATP

ADP

H

H

D

P+

P+

D

D

P+

H

TRENDS in Microbiology 

Fig. 1. Two-component systems consist of a sensor protein (histidine kinase) that
transfers a high-energy phosphoryl group to the response regulator, which is
often a transcription factor. (a) The sensor protein autophosphorylates on a con-
served histidine residue (H) in the kinases domain (blue), often in response to sig-
nal sensing in the sensing domain (purple). The high-energy phosphoryl group (P)
is then transferred to a conserved aspartate (D) residue in the receiver domain
(green) of the response regulator, often changing the ability of its regulatory
domain (grey) to bind DNA. (b) The His-Asp-His-Asp three-step phosphorelay con-
sists of the transfer of the phosphoryl group from the conserved histidine in the
sensor to additional phosphorylatable aspartate and histidine residues in auxiliary
domains before transfer
the
response regulator. Many different arrangements of these extra phosphorylatable
domains exist within proteins and pathways. They are either present in separate
proteins, a representative example of which is depicted here, or part of multi-
domain (hybrid) sensors.

to the aspartate in the receiver domain of

http://timi.trends.com 0966-842X/03/$ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/S0966-842X(03)00176-8

