Developmental Cell

Article

Differential Expression of WOX Genes
Mediates Apical-Basal Axis Formation
in the Arabidopsis Embryo

Holger Breuninger,1,2,3 Enno Rikirsch,1,2 Marita Hermann,1 Minako Ueda,1 and Thomas Laux1,*
1Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Schaenzlestraße 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany
2These authors contributed equally to this work
3Present address: John Innes Centre, Colney Lane, Norwich, NR4 7UH, UK
*Correspondence: laux@biologie.uni-freiburg.de
DOI 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.03.008

SUMMARY

Axis formation is one of the earliest patterning events
in plant and animal embryogenesis. In Arabidopsis,
the main axis of the embryo is evident at the asym-
metric division of the zygote into a small, embryonic
apical cell and a large extraembryonic basal cell.
Here we show that the homeobox genes WOX2 and
WOX8, which are initially coexpressed in the zygote,
act as complementary cell fate regulators in the apical
and basal lineage, respectively. Furthermore, WOX8
expression in the basal cell lineage is required for
WOX2 expression and normal development of the
proembryo, suggesting an inductive mechanism.
The identiﬁed WOX cascade is required for normal ex-
pression of a reporter gene of the auxin efﬂux carrier
PIN1 and for the formation of auxin response maxima
in the proembryo. Thus, our results link the spatial
separation of WOX transcription factors to localized
auxin response and the formation of the main body
axis in the embryo.

INTRODUCTION

Development of a speciﬁc body plan during embryogenesis re-
quires the coordination of cell fates according to their positions
along the embryo axes. In animal model organisms, the accessi-
bility of egg cells has greatly enhanced analysis of early pattern-
ing. In higher plants, however, the zygote is relatively inaccessible
to experimental analysis due to the surrounding maternal tissue,
and the high degree of genetic redundancy has complicated
analysis of regulatory mechanisms. An invariant cell division
pattern during early embryogenesis in Arabidopsis facilitates
the following of the apical and basal lineages derived from each
daughter cell (Figure 1A; Dolan et al., 1993; Mansﬁeld and Briarty,
1991). First, the zygote divides asymmetrically and generates
two daughter cells with different properties and developmental
programs. The small and densely cytoplasmic apical daughter
divides perpendicular to the orientation of the division of the zy-
gote, and subsequent divisions generate the isodiametric cells
of the apical cell lineage, termed proembryo. At the 8-cell stage,
the proembryo is already divided into an upper tier of cells giving

rise to the shoot and a lower tier of cells giving rise to the hypo-
cotyl and embryonic root. Subsequent tangential cell walls estab-
lish the radial axis, separating protoderm and inner cells before
shoot meristem, cotyledon, hypocotyl, and embryonic root pri-
mordia are formed. By contrast, the larger and more vacuolated
basal daughter cell of the zygote continues to divide horizontally,
producing a ﬁle of elongated cells, termed the suspensor, which
pushes the embryo into the lumen of the developing seed
(Ju¨ rgens and Mayer, 1994; Mansﬁeld and Briarty, 1991). Only
the uppermost cell of the basal lineage, the hypophysis, becomes
incorporated into the embryo where it gives rise to the quiescent
center and the columella stem cells of the root meristem (for
review see Jenik et al., 2007; Ju¨ rgens, 2001; Laux et al., 2004).
Similar to animals with invariant cell division patterns, speciﬁca-
tion of cell
identities in the Arabidopsis embryo relies on
cell-cell communication.

Recent studies have revealed a crucial role for the directional
transport of the plant growth factor auxin in apical-basal axis for-
mation. After the asymmetric division of the zygote, the auxin ef-
ﬂux factor PIN-FORMED7 (PIN7) is expressed only in the basal
daughter cell and becomes localized to the membrane facing
the apical daughter (Friml et al., 2003). Presumably, auxin is
transported into the apical daughter cell where it accumulates,
as evidenced by weak expression of the synthetic auxin re-
sponse reporter gene DR5rev:GFP. Auxin ﬂux is then thought
to be reversed in the globular stage embryo, involving the com-
bined activity of several PIN proteins, which results in the forma-
tion of an auxin response maximum at the developing root pole.
Later in embryogenesis, additional auxin response maxima are
formed at the tips of the emerging cotyledons mediated by polar
cellular localization of PIN1 protein, which is thought to play an
important role in auxin ﬂux from the globular embryo stage on-
ward (Benkova et al., 2003). Loss of multiple members of the
PIN family; mutations in the Auxin Response Factor (ARF)
GTPase exchange factor GNOM (GN), which is required for di-
rectional trafﬁcking of PIN1 protein; and chemical inhibition of
polar auxin transport all cause striking defects in apical-basal
embryo patterning, demonstrating the crucial role of polar auxin
distribution in axis formation (Blilou et al., 2005; Friml et al., 2003;
Geldner et al., 2003; Mayer et al., 1993; Steinmann et al., 1999).
Similarly, embryos that have lost the ARF MONOPTEROS (MP)
or harbor auxin nondegradable variants of its antagonist BOD-
ENLOS (BDL) fail to initiate the hypophysis, indicating that tran-
scriptional responses to auxin are required for root initiation

Developmental Cell 14, 867–876, June 2008 ª2008 Elsevier Inc. 867

