 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

Child Development, January/February 2000, Volume 71, Number 1, Pages 21—25

Does Memory Development Belong on an Endangered Topic List?

Deanna Kuhn

Although memory has long been regarded as a central and well-de(cid:222)ned topic within the (cid:222)eld of cognitive de-
velopment, developments in and related to the study of memory increasingly suggest that the study of mem-
ory needs to be situated in a number of broader conceptual and research contexts. Four of these contexts are
identi(cid:222)ed here and the ways they accommodate memory phenomena are examined: (1) knowledge (what is re-
membered?); (2) comprehension (what does it mean?); (3) context/function (why remember?); and (4) strategy
(how to remember?). 
, it is suggested, are best examined as knowledge structures that are the product
of efforts to understand and to know, and 
 is a socially situated activity undertaken in the service of
individual or social goals.

memorizing

Memories

INTRODUCTION
The question posed in the title of this article will strike
many as curious and even ill-conceived. Topics come
and go in our (cid:222)eld(cid:209)theory of mind, for example, at
the moment has assumed the center-stage role held
by conservation training a few decades ago. But the
topic of memory seems of a different sort altogether, a
topic with a long tradition inherited from experimen-
tal psychology and one demanding coverage in any
comprehensive  treatment  of  cognition  or  cognitive
development, more an enduring chapter title than a
passing  fancy.  Indeed,  as  Schneider  and  Bjorklund
(1998) begin their recent review, (cid:210)Memory develop-
ment has been one of the most-studied topics in all of
cognitive development(cid:211) (p. 467). What(cid:213)s more, mem-
ory has proven itself a topic of great applied relevance,
as attested to by the burst of studies on children(cid:213)s eye-
witness testimony and the accuracy of autobiograph-
ical memory.

What I wish to propose here is not that the impres-
sive volume of research devoted to memory develop-
ment  has  been  misguided  or  unproductive.  Rather,
my claim is that this millennial juncture in the history
of our (cid:222)eld coincides with a transition in the study of
memory. Developments in and related to the study
of memory make it necessary that the study of mem-
ory be situated in a number of broader contexts. Doing
so stands to ultimately enrich, not diminish, its im-
portance, even though it may compromise the clear
identity that memory now enjoys as a (cid:210)chapter title(cid:211)
topic. Speci(cid:222)cally, I argue for the need to identify the
study  of  memory  and  its  development  and  embed  it
within the context of the four topics depicted in Figure 1:
comprehension, knowledge, context, and strategy.

Although cast in the broader language of knowing
(rather than remembering), each of the four topics in
Figure 1 can be identi(cid:222)ed by a question it asks related

to memory: namely, what are we remembering, what
does it mean, why are we remembering, and how
will we do it? Each of these questions, I claim, in-
vokes a broader context in which the study of mem-
ory needs to be situated. After considering each of the
four, I conclude by addressing the implications of such
incorporation for memory development as a topic in
its own right.

As part of this situating of the study of memory, it
is necessary to distinguish two increasingly divergent
branches of memory research. One, connected to the
topics of comprehension and knowledge, can be re-
ferred to as the study of memories. These are the rep-
resentations that are formed, largely without inten-
tion or awareness, as the product of human efforts to
understand and to know. The other branch, which in-
vokes  the  topics  of  context  and  strategy,  can  be  re-
ferred to as the study of memorizing, a cognitive activ-
ity engaged in deliberately for a purpose and toward a
goal.  In  discussing  comprehension  and  knowledge,
therefore, we focus on memories, while memorizing
is the focus in the discussion of context and strategy.

COMPREHENSION: UNDERSTANDING AS 
THE TRANSPORT VEHICLE OF MEMORIES
If memory research has taught us anything, it is the in-
adequacy of a traditional model of memory develop-
ment  that  can  be  characterized  as  the  (cid:210)cupboard(cid:211)
model. Memory, according to this model, is the compan-
ion process to learning. Learning gets material into the
cupboard and memory stores it there until it is needed.
Memory development consists of cupboards getting
bigger and, possibly, more organized, as represented
by more (cid:222)nely differentiated storage compartments.

' 2000 by the Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/2000/7101-0003

