Foundations of Logic 

Carlos Zednik, PhD 
czednik@uos.de 

Winter 2014/2015 

Wednesdays, 14:00-16:00, Room 31/E06 

Course Description 

Logic is the study of reasoning, and aims to distinguish between good and bad methods of reasoning. 
As such, logic is important for evaluating methods of reasoning in science as well as in everyday life. 
In cognitive science, logic is additionally important for understanding and developing natural and 
artificial reasoners. This course will cover the foundations of classical logic, including propositional 
and predicate logic, validity, soundness, proofs, and completeness. 

 

Requirements 

This is a 6 ECTS course. In order to receive six credits you must:   

- 

Score a minimum of 120 points in weekly homework assignments. 
There will be 12 homework assignments, each of which will receive a score from 0 to 20. 

-  Pass the final exam, held in class during the final lecture meeting on Wednesday, February 

4th 2015. There will be a make-up exam at a date, time and location to be announced. 

The grade you receive for the final or make-up exam will be the grade you receive for the course. 
The maximum grade you can receive on the make-up exam is 4.0. 

Homework assignments will be posted on Stud.IP after every lecture, and must be turned in on 
paper to the AVZ doorman before the following lecture. Homework assignments turned in any 
other way, turned in late, or not turned in at all will receive a score of 0. Homework assignments can 
be done alone, or in groups of two or three, and each homework assignment should include the 
names of all group members as well as your tutor’s name. 

Although working in groups is encouraged for the homework assignments, it is prohibited for the 
final and make-up exams. Anyone caught collaborating or otherwise cheating on the final or make-
up exam will receive a course grade of 5.0. 

 

Tutors 

Five tutors have kindly agreed to help with this course. They are: 

Johannes Bausenwein   jbausenwein@uos.de 
Frederik Harder  
Max Ilsen  
 
Jan Kirchner  
 
Marie Sindermann  

fharder@uos.de 
milsen@uos.de 
jkirchner@uos.de 
msindermann@uos.de 

Each tutor will lead a tutorial session in which the current week’s lecture is reviewed, past 
homework assignments are returned and discussed, and questions about the current homework 
assignment can be answered. You should sign up for one tutorial session on Stud.IP. 

