Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
Vol. 95, pp. 2609–2614, March 1998
Neurobiology

Overrepresentation of horizontal and vertical orientation
preferences in developing ferret area 17

(oblique effect兾activity maps兾orientation maps兾optical imaging)

BARBARA CHAPMAN* AND TOBIAS BONHOEFFER†
Max Planck Institute of Neurobiology, Am Klopferspitz 18A, 82152 Munich-Martinsried, Germany

Edited by Carla J. Shatz, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, and approved December 10, 1997 (received for review May 23, 1996)

ABSTRACT
One of the fundamental principles of visual
cortical organization is that neurons form a ‘‘map’’ in which
neighboring cells have similar orientation preferences. Pre-
vious anatomical and imaging studies have shown that al-
though the exact layouts of these orientation preference maps
vary between individuals, features of iso-orientation domains
such as width and spacing appear constant within a species.
Using chronic optical imaging of intrinsic signals we now
demonstrate that in ferret area 17 a larger proportion of
cortical surface is dominated by responses to horizontal and
vertical contours than to the two oblique orientations. This
was true for all ferrets studied both during development and
in adulthood. Interestingly, however, we found that the degree
of the overrepresentation varied significantly between indi-
vidual animals. In some young ferrets, responses to horizontal
and vertical stimuli developed faster than responses to oblique
stimuli, and a much larger percentage of the cortex responded
preferentially to horizontal and vertical stimuli. In other
individuals, responses to all stimuli developed at roughly the
same rate, and there was relatively little overrepresentation of
horizontal and vertical preferences.

We have used chronic optical imaging of intrinsic signals (1) to
examine developing orientation activity maps in ferret primary
visual cortex. The ferret was chosen for these studies because
it has a visual system similar to the cat’s (2) but is born
approximately 3 weeks earlier in development (3), thus pro-
viding a robust physiological preparation during the time that
orientation-specific responses develop (ref. 4; see also refs. 5
and 6).

The technique of optical imaging permits observation of the
overall spatial organization of orientation preference across a
region of visual cortex, information not easily obtained from
single-unit studies. Furthermore, by measuring the collective
response of a large number of neurons simultaneously, optical
imaging avoids many of the sampling problems that can occur
in studies of single-cell responses. Chronic imaging allows the
development of orientation maps to be followed over time in
individual animals, removing the necessity to pool data across
animals. This technique therefore is not only ideal for assessing
the proportion of cortical surface devoted to processing dif-
ferent orientations during development, but it can also reveal
interanimal variability in the representation of orientation
preferences, which would be missed by conventional electro-
physiological recordings.

All of the ferrets in this study (eight developing and three
adult) showed a significant overrepresentation of horizontal
and vertical versus oblique orientation preferences in their
cortical maps. In the eight developing ferrets, there were large

differences in the magnitude of this anisotropy. Furthermore,
in the developing animals with larger anisotropies, the hori-
zontal and vertical activity maps also tended to develop
significantly faster than the oblique maps.

The bias toward horizontal and vertical preferences seen in
all of the ferrets studied is consistent with electrophysiological
studies in the cat (7–14) and kitten (15), which suggest that
there may be more cortical cells with horizontal and vertical
preferences. The observed interanimal variability in the degree
of the bias is surprising, as previous studies have suggested that
basic features of iso-orientation domains such as hypercolumn
spacing are relatively constant between animals (refs. 16–24;
but see also ref. 25). The variability may, however, help to
explain why some laboratories have failed to demonstrate the
horizontal兾vertical bias electrophysiologically in either cats
(26–28) or kittens (29–31). Finally, this variability might
underlie the interindividual variation that has been observed
in psychophysical studies of the ‘‘oblique effect’’
in cats,
monkeys, and humans (32–36).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Optical Imaging of Intrinsic Signals. Eight young (31–35
days old at the beginning of the experiments) and three adult
(4.5 months to 1 year old) ferrets (Marshall Farms, New Rose,
NY) were used in this study. Experiments were performed
under aseptic conditions by using standard procedures for
optical
imaging (37). Anesthesia was induced by using a
mixture of xylazine and ketamine. Animals were intubated and
mechanically ventilated. Anesthesia was maintained by using
1–3% halothane delivered in a 3:1 mixture of nitrous ox-
ide:oxygen. End-tidal carbon dioxide was maintained at 3.8–
4.2%. Subcutaneous injections of ⬇1 ml兾hr 5% dextrose
Ringer’s solution were administered to prevent dehydration.
During the initial imaging session, the scalp was incised and
retracted and a craniotomy was performed over the caudal
pole of the left hemisphere. The dura remained intact. Two
percent agar and a glass coverslip were applied over the
craniotomy. Animals were fitted with contact lenses to focus
the eyes on the monitor placed 33 cm in front of the animal.
The brain was illuminated through the dura by using a halogen
lamp and fiber optics, with the illumination band-pass filtered
at 707 ⫾ 10 nm, a wavelength that provides good penetration
of the dura. The signals were recorded with a cooled charge-
coupled device camera (Princeton Instruments, Trenton, NJ)
and a macroscope (38) focused approximately 500 ␮m below
the cortical surface. Five frames of 600-msec duration were
collected during each 3-sec stimulus presentation. Following
each recording session, the agar and coverslip were removed,
and the craniotomy was flushed with sterile saline and covered

The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge
payment. This article must therefore be hereby marked ‘‘advertisement’’ in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. §1734 solely to indicate this fact.
© 1998 by The National Academy of Sciences 0027-8424兾98兾952609-6$2.00兾0
PNAS is available online at http:兾兾www.pnas.org.

This paper was submitted directly (Track II) to the Proceedings office.
Abbreviation: ROI, region of interest.
*Present address: Center for Neuroscience, 1544 Newton Court,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616.
†To whom reprint requests should be addressed.

2609

