This is a reformatted version of an article that appeared in Rev. Modern Physics 66, 1481-1507 (1994)

Biological Pattern Formation : from Basic Mechanisms to Complex

Structures

A. J. Koch1 and H. Meinhardt

http://www.eb.tuebingen.mpg.de/meinhardt; hans.meinhardt@tuebingen.mpg.de

Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology

Spemannstr. 35, D- 72076 T¨ubingen

The reliable development of highly complex organ-
isms is an intriguing and fascinating problem. The
genetic material is, as a rule, the same in each cell
of an organism. How do then cells, under the inﬂu-
ence of their common genes, produce spatial pat-
terns ? Simple models are discussed that describe
the generation of patterns out of an initially nearly
homogeneous state. They are based on nonlinear
interactions of at least two chemicals and on their
diffusion. The concepts of local autocatalysis and of
long range inhibition play a fundamental role. Nu-
merical simulations show that the models account
for many basic biological observations such as the
regeneration of a pattern after excision of tissue or
the production of regular (or nearly regular) arrays of
organs during production of regular (or nearly regu-
lar) arrays of organs during (or after) completion of
growth.
Very complex patterns can be generated in a repro-
ducible way by hierarchical coupling of several such
elementary reactions. Applications to animal coating
and to the generation of polygonally shaped patterns
are provided.
It is further shown how to generate a
strictly periodic pattern of units that themselves ex-
hibit a complex and polar ﬁne structure. This is il-
lustrated by two examples : the assembly of photore-
ceptor cells in the eye of Drosophila and the position-
ing of leaves and axillary buds in a growing shoot. In
both cases, the substructures have to achieve an in-
ternal polarity under the inﬂuence of some primary
pattern forming system existing in the ﬂy’s eye or in
the plant. The fact that similar models can describe
essential steps in so distantly related organisms as
animals and plants suggests that they reveal some
universal mechanisms.

1

1. INTRODUCTION

A most fascinating aspect of biological systems is the
generation of complex organisms in each round of the
life cycle. Higher organisms develop, as the rule, from a
single fertilized egg. The result is a highly reproducible
arrangement of differentiated cells. Many processes are
involved, for example cell differentiation, cell movement,
shape changes of cells and tissues, region-speciﬁc con-
trol of cell division and cell death. Development of an
organism is, of course, under genetic control but the ge-
netic information is usually the same in all cells. A crucial
problem is therefore the generation of spatial patterns
that allow a different fate of some cells in relation to oth-
ers.

The complexity of the evolving pattern seems to pre-
clude any mathematical theory. However, by experi-
mental
interference with a developing organism it has
turned out that the individual steps are fairly indepen-
dent of each other. For instance, the organization of the
anteroposterior axis (i.e., the head to tail pattern) in a
Drosophila embryo is controlled by a completely different
set of genes than the dorsoventral axis. Shortly after its
initiation, the development of a wing is largely indepen-
dent of the surrounding tissue and can progress even at
an ectopic position after transplantation. Therefore, mod-
els can be written for elementary steps in development.
The linkage of these steps requires then a second ap-
proximation.

The necessity of mathematical models for morpho-
genesis is evident. Pattern formation is certainly based
on the interaction of many components. Since the inter-
actions are expected to be nonlinear, our intuition is in-
sufﬁcient to check whether a particular assumption really
accounts for the experimental observation. By modelling,
the weak points of an hypothesis become evident and the
initial hypothesis can be modiﬁed or improved. Models
contain often simplifying assumptions and different mod-
els may account equally well for a particular observation.
This diversity should however be considered as an ad-
vantage : multiplicity of models stimulates the design of

