The Plant Journal (2013)

doi: 10.1111/tpj.12348

TCP3 interacts with R2R3-MYB proteins, promotes ﬂavonoid
biosynthesis and negatively regulates the auxin response in
Arabidopsis thaliana

Shutian Li* and Sabine Zachgo*
Department of Botany, Osnabru¨ ck University, Barbarastr. 11, 49076 Osnabru¨ ck, Germany

Received 2 September 2013; revised 16 September 2013; accepted 1 October 2013.
*For correspondence (e-mails: zachgo@biologie.uni-osnabrueck.de or shutian.li@biologie.uni-osnabrueck.de).

SUMMARY

TCP proteins belong to the plant-speciﬁc bHLH transcription factor family, and function as key regulators of
diverse developmental processes. Functional redundancy amongst family members and post-transcriptional
down-regulation by miRJAW of several TCP genes complicate their functional characterization. Here, we
explore the role of TCP3 by analyzing transgenic plants expressing miRJAW-resistant mTCP3 and dominant-
negative TCP3SRDX. Seedlings and seeds of mTCP3 plants were found to hyper-accumulate ﬂavonols, an-
thocyanins and proanthocyanidins, whereas levels of proanthocyanidins were slightly reduced in TCP3SRDX
plants. R2R3-MYB proteins control not only early ﬂavonoid biosynthetic steps but also activate late ﬂavo-
noid biosynthetic genes by forming ternary R2R3-MYB/bHLH/WD40 (MBW) complexes. TCP3 interacted in
yeast with R2R3-MYB proteins, which was further conﬁrmed in planta using BiFC experiments. Yeast three-
hybrid assays revealed that TCP3 signiﬁcantly strengthened the transcriptional activation capacity of R2R3-
MYBs bound by the bHLH protein TT8. Transcriptome analysis of mTCP3 and TCP3SRDX plants supported a
role for TCP3 in enhancing ﬂavonoid biosynthesis. Moreover, several auxin-related developmental abnor-
malities were observed in mTCP3 plants. Transcriptome data coupled with studies of an auxin response
reporter and auxin efﬂux carriers showed that TCP3 negatively modulates the auxin response, probably by
compromising auxin transport capacity. Genetic experiments revealed that the chalcone synthase mutant
tt4-11 lacking ﬂavonoid biosynthesis abrogated the auxin-related defects caused by mTCP3. Together, these
data suggest that TCP3 interactions with R2R3-MYBs lead to enhanced ﬂavonoid production, which further
negatively modulates the auxin response.

Keywords: TCP3, ﬂavonoids, auxin response, R2R3-MYBs, MBW complexes, transparent testa 4.

INTRODUCTION

The plant-speciﬁc TCP family of transcription factors is
named after the ﬁrst three identiﬁed members: TEOSINTE
BRANCHED1 in maize (Zea mays), CYCLOIDEA (CYC) in
Antirrhinum majus, and PROLIFERATING CELL NUCLEAR
ANTIGEN FACTOR in rice (Oryza sativa). Repeated gene
duplications during land plant evolution have enlarged this
family of bHLH-containing DNA-binding proteins (Martın-
Trillo and Cubas, 2010). The Arabidopsis thaliana genome
encodes 24 TCP transcription factors. Based on the struc-
ture of their conserved TCP domains, 13 TCP proteins have
been identiﬁed as members of class I (TCP-P) and have
been suggested to function as positive regulators of cell
proliferation (Kosugi and Ohashi, 2002). The other 11 TCP
proteins belong to class II (TCP-C). CYC controls ﬂoral sym-
metry formation in Antirrhinum (Luo et al., 1996), and its
Arabidopsis ortholog TCP1 participates in brassinosteroid

© 2013 The Authors
The Plant Journal © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

two class

biosynthesis and modulates longitudinal elongation of
leaves and stems (Guo et al., 2010; Koyama et al., 2010b).
The products of
II/TCP-C genes, TCP12
(BRANCHED2) and TCP18 (BRANCHED1), operate as inte-
grators of branching signals within axillary buds (Aguilar-
Martinez et al., 2007), and TCP12 has also been shown to
repress the ﬂoral transition of axillary meristems (Niwa
et al., 2013). Generation of miRJAW-resistant versions and
dominant-negative forms of TCPs have revealed function-
ally redundant roles for miRJAW-targeted CINCINNATA
(CIN)-TCP genes (TCP2-4, TCP10 and TCP24) in the control
of
leaf morphogenesis and senescence by modulating
jasmonate biosynthesis (Palatnik et al., 2003; Schommer
et al., 2008). Class II CIN-TCPs have also been shown to
regulate the morphogenesis of shoot lateral organs as well
as correct petal and stamen development (Palatnik et al.,

1

