Vol  18  2014

ANALYSIS

275

EdinLR Vol 18 pp 275-279
DOI:  10.3366/elr.2014.0212

Piercing the Corporate Veil:  Prest v Petrodel

Resources Ltd

The  Supreme Court in Prest v  Petrodel Resources Ltd'  has taken  the opportunity  to
restrict the occasions  when the corporate  veil may be lifted.

A.  THE FACTS

A wealthy Nigerian oil-trader, Michael Prest,2  divorced his wife, Yasmin, but refused
to pay  any of the  lump  sum  or maintenance  payments  to which  she was  entitled  in
terms of their divorce.  In the words of Lord Sumption,  "the husband's  conduct of the
proceedings has been characterised by persistent obstruction, obfuscation  and deceit,
and  a contumelious  refusal to comply with rules of court and specific orders."  Prest
was formerly  an executive with the colourful  oil trader, Marc  Rich, who  died in 2013,
having spent many years  on the  run from the American  courts for sanctions-busting
and  tax evasion.
When the enforcement proceedings relating to the divorce settlement were being
heard  in  the  lower courts,  Moylan  J used  his  powers  under  sections  23-25  of the
Matrimonial  Causes  Act  1973 to order  that Prest  should procure  the conveyance  of
the  matrimonial home  to his  ex-wife  and make  various  other payments.  In addition
Moylan  J  ordered  the  transfer  of seven  UK  properties,  legally  owned  by  British
companies  that  Prest  controlled,  to  Prest's  ex-wife  in  partial  satisfaction  of a  lump
sum  order. The judge  directed those  companies to execute  such  documents as would
give  effect  to the  transfer  of the  properties  to  her. The transfer  of the  matrimonial
home  took place  but the  decision  relating to  the  seven  properties  was  appealed  by
the companies  that Prest controlled. They sought to set aside the judge's order on the
grounds  that the judge had no jurisdiction  to make  such  an  order. The decision was
appealed to the Supreme  Court.

All  the Justices of the Supreme  Court clearly thought that Prest should be  made  to
pay the  sums  due under  the divorce  settlement and  Lord Sumption  found  a way  to

B.  THE DECISION

1  [2013]  UKSC  34, [2013]  2 AC 415.
2  Details  of  Prest s  background  and  his  business  career, 

in  his  own  words,  may  be  found
at  http://powerlistfoundation.org.uk/about-us/trustees/item/38-michael-j-prest. Another  view  of  his
business activities  (and indeed Marc Rich's)  maybe found at http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2005-
07-17/the-rich-boys.

3  Prest at para  4.

