502

B H A B H A, H O M I

reﬁned this picture, placing less emphasis
on the requirement of systematicity (con-
cepts are “miniature theories” [2006: xxii])
and by arguing that the relationship be-
tween concept and object is, at root, met-
aphorical. A metaphor asks us to compare
two terms according to a ground, and this
has several consequences:
it brings out
something both new and speciﬁc in the
objects compared and it places them in
new frames of references. In the same
way, theoretical concepts are not meant
to coincide with the object they help de-
scribe. They pull out new aspects of the
object and introduce it into a new frame of
reference (Bal 1994). By insisting on the
generality of concepts and their heuristic
rather than representative function, Bal is
able to treat concepts as speciﬁc but at the
same time nomadic, capable of “traveling”
from one discipline to another (2002).

SEE ALSO: Cultural Studies; Genette,
Gerard; Narratology and Structuralism

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READING

Bal, M. (1985). Narratology: Introduction to the
Theory of Narrative (trans. C. van Boheemen).
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Bal, M. (1991). Reading Rembrandt: Beyond the
Word–Image Opposition. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Bal, M. (1994). Scared to death. In M. Bal & I. E.
Boer (eds.), The Point of Theory: Practices of
Cultural Analysis. New York: Continuum.

Bal, M. (1999a). Introduction. In The Practice
of Cultural Analysis: Exposing Interdisciplinary
Interpretation. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.

Bal, M. (1999b). Memories in the museum: Pre-
posterous histories for today. In Acts of Memory:
Cultural Recall in the Present. Hanover, NH:
University Press of New England.

Bal, M. (1999c). Quoting Caravaggio: Contemporary
Art, Preposterous History. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Bal, M. (2002). Travelling Concepts in the Human-
ities: A Rough Guide. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.

Bal, M. (2006). A Mieke Bal Reader. Chicago: Uni-

versity of Chicago Press.

Cherry, D. (ed.) (2008). About Mieke Bal. Oxford:

Wiley-Blackwell.

Genette, G. (1980). Narrative Discourse: An Essay in
Method (trans. J. E. Lewin). Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.

Silverman, K. (2008). Je vous. In D. Cherry (ed.),

About Mieke Bal. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Bhabha, Homi
ANKHI MUKHERJEE

Homi K. Bhabha is a foundational ﬁgure
for postcolonial theory. He was born in
Bombay, India, in 1949, educated at the
University of Bombay and Christ Church,
Oxford, and is at present Professor of the
Humanities in the Department of English
and American Literature
at Harvard
University.

Bhabha’s most signiﬁcant book, arguably,
is The Location of Culture, a collection of
writings published in 1994, which includes
deﬁnitive versions of his inﬂuential essays
“The other question,” “Of mimicry and
man,” “Signs taken for wonders,” and
“DissemiNation.” Nation and Narration,
edited by Bhabha, is another central text in
his oeuvre, containing a variety of contribu-
tions on national narratives. “Foreword:
Remembering Fanon: Self, psyche, and
the colonial condition,” Bhabha’s 1986
introduction to the Pluto edition of Frantz
Fanon’s Black Skin, White Masks, played a
key role in the 1980s revival of Fanon’s work
and in the resurgence of critical appropria-
tions of Fanon in the academy, which Henry
Louis Gates, Jr., (1991) has termed “critical
Fanonism.” Bhabha is also the author of
several inﬂuential critical articles, such as
“At the Limits” (1989), a commentary on
the aftermath of Salman Rushdie’s Satanic
Verses, “Queen’s English” (1997), a study of

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

