Edgar Allan Poe. “Critical Notices.” Southern Literary Messenger 2 (1836): 659-662.  

 

∞∞∞∞∞∞∞  

 

CRITICAL NOTICES.  

PHILOTHEA.  

Philothea:. Romance. By Mrs. Child, author of the Mother’s Book, &c. Boston: Otis, 
Broaders, Co. New York: George Dearborn.  

Mrs. Child is well known as the author of “Hobomok,” “The American Frugal Housewife,” 
and the “Mother’s Book.” She is also the editor of a “Juvenile Miscellany.” The work before 
us is of a character very distinct from that of any of these publications, and places the fair 
writer in a new and most favorable light. Philothea is of that class of works of which the 
Telemachus of Fenelon, and the Anarchlarsis of Barthelemi, are the most favorable 
specimens. Overwhelmed in a long-continued inundation of second-hand airs and ignorance, 
done up in green muslin, we turn to these pure and quiet pages with that species of gasping 
satisfaction with which a drowning man clutches the shore.  

The plot of Philothea is simple. The scene is principally in ancient Athens, during the 
administration of Pericles; and some of the chief personages of his time are brought, with 
himself, upon the stage. Among these are Aspasia, Alcibiades, Hippocrates, Anaxagoras of 
Clazomenæ, Plato, Hermippus the comic writer, Phidias the Sculptor, Artaxerxes of Persia, 
and Xerxes his son. Philothea, the heroine of the tale, and the grand daughter of Anaxagoras, 
is of a majestic beauty, of great purity and elevation of mind. Her friend, Etidora, of a more 
delicate loveliness, and more flexile disposition, is the adopted daughter of Phidias, who 
bought her, when an infant, of a goat-herd in Phelle — herself and nurse having been stolen 
from the Ionian coast by Greek pirates, the nurse sold into slavery, and the child delivered to 
the care of the goat-herd. The ladies, of course, have lovers. Eudora is betrothed to Philæmon. 
This Athenian, the son of the wealthy Cherilaus, but whose mother was born in Corinth, has 
incurred the dislike of Aspasia, the wife of Pericles. She procures the revival of an ancient law 
subjecting to a heavy fine all citizens who married foreigners, and declaring all persons, 
whose parents were not both Athenians, incapable of voting in the public assemblies or of 
inheriting the estates of their fathers. Philæmon, thus deprived of citizenship, prevented from 
holding office, and without hope of any patrimony, is obliged to postpone, indefinitely, his 
union with Eudora. The revisal of the obnoxious law has also a disastrous effect upon the 
interests of Philothea. She is beloved of Paralus, the son of Pericles, and returns his affection. 
But in marrying, she will bring upon him losses and degradation. Pericles, too, looks with an 
evil eye upon her poverty, and the idea of marriage is therefore finally abandoned.  

Matters are thus situated, when Philothea, being appointed one of the Canephoræ, (whose 
duty it is to embroider the sacred peplus, and to carry baskets in the procession of the 
Panathenaia,) is rigidly secluded by law, for six months, within the walls of the Acropolis. 
During this time, Eudora, deprived of the good counsel and example of her friend, becomes a 
frequent visitor at the house of Aspasia, by whose pernicious influence she is insensibly 

