NeuroImage 106 (2015) 144–153

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

NeuroImage

j ou r n a l h o m e p a ge : w ww . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l oc a te / yn i mg

Effective connectivity within the frontoparietal control network
differentiates cognitive control and working memory
Ian H. Harding a,b,⁎, Murat Yücel b, Ben J. Harrison a, Christos Pantelis a, Michael Breakspear c,d
a Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne & Melbourne Health, Melbourne, Australia
b Monash Clinical and Imaging Neuroscience, School of Psychological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
c QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
d Metro North Mental Health Service, Brisbane, QLD, Australia

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 18 November 2014
Available online 22 November 2014

Keywords:
Cognitive control
Working memory
Dynamic causal modeling
Frontoparietal
Effective connectivity

Cognitive control and working memory rely upon a common fronto-parietal network that includes the inferior
frontal junction (IFJ), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), pre-supplementary motor area/dorsal anterior cin-
gulate cortex (pSMA/dACC), and intraparietal sulcus (IPS). This network is able to ﬂexibly adapt its function in
response to changing behavioral goals, mediating a wide range of cognitive demands. Here we apply dynamic
causal modeling to functional magnetic resonance imaging data to characterize task-related alterations in the
strength of network interactions across distinct cognitive processes. Evidence in favor of task-related connectivity
dynamics was accrued across a very large space of possible network structures. Cognitive control and working
memory demands were manipulated using a factorial combination of the multi-source interference task and a
verbal 2-back working memory task, respectively. Both were found to alter the sensitivity of the IFJ to perceptual
information, and to increase IFJ-to-pSMA/dACC connectivity. In contrast, increased connectivity from the pSMA/
dACC to the IPS, as well as from the dlPFC to the IFJ, was uniquely driven by cognitive control demands; a task-
induced negative inﬂuence of the dlPFC on the pSMA/dACC was speciﬁc to working memory demands. These re-
sults reﬂect a system of both shared and unique context-dependent dynamics within the fronto-parietal net-
work. Mechanisms supporting cognitive engagement, response selection, and action evaluation may be shared
across cognitive domains, while dynamic updating of task and context representations within this network are
potentially speciﬁc to changing demands on cognitive control.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction

Cognitive control (CC) and working memory (WM) rely on neural
processing within a common set of brain regions encompassing
dorsomedial prefrontal, lateral prefrontal, and superior parietal regions
of the human cortex (Fedorenko et al., 2013; Harding et al., in press;
Niendam et al., 2012). This so-called “frontoparietal network” (FPN)
represents a ﬂexible, superordinate system supporting adaptive behav-
ioral control across a broad range of cognitive demands (Cocchi et al.,
2013; Cole et al., 2013; Dosenbach et al., 2008). The inherent ﬂexibility
of this system has been linked to rapid adjustments in neuronal re-
sponse proﬁles as a function of changing behavioral goals or contextual
cues (Kadohisa et al., 2013; Stokes et al., 2013). However, the neural
mechanisms underlying such dynamic representation of unique behav-
ioral goals and encoding of diverse contextual information remain
unclear.

⁎ Corresponding author at: School of Psychological Sciences, Building 17, Clayton

Campus, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia. Fax: +61 3 9348 0469.

E-mail address: ian.harding@monash.edu (I.H. Harding).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.039
1053-8119/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Functional neuroimaging research has established that activity in
the regions forming the FPN demonstrate temporal coherence
(i.e., functional connectivity) in human subjects at rest (Cole and
Schneider, 2007; Power et al., 2011). The magnitude of these intrinsic
inter-regional interactions has additionally been shown to selectively
change in response to behavioral demands, as demonstrated most clear-
ly in studies exploring the dynamic interplay between the dorsomedial
and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices during cognitive control tasks
(Carter and van Veen, 2007; Prado et al., 2011; Stephan et al., 2003).

More recently, research has moved beyond the study of FPN
connectivity using pair-wise correlations in brain signals, employing tech-
niques that are sensitive to network-wide and directional interdepen-
dencies (i.e., effective connectivity; Friston, 2011). Dynamic causal
modeling (DCM) provides one means to infer neural interactions and
their task-dependent changes within a brain network (Friston et al.,
2003). In contrast to alternative effective connectivity modeling ap-
proaches (e.g., Structural Equation Modeling), DCM models dynamics at
the level of neuronal populations, as opposed to the measured hemody-
namics, providing greater construct validity to derived models of network
function (Daunizeau et al., 2011). Moreover, DCM does not depend on the
temporal precedence of one regional time series relative to another (as in

