Stuckless, N., The Vengeance Scale: Development of a Measure of Attitudes Toward Revenge , 
Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 7:1 (1992) p.25 

The Vengeance Scale: Development of a Measure 

of Attitudes Toward Revenge 

Noreen Stuckless 
Richard Goranson 

Psychology Department, Yorle University 
North Yorle, Ontario, CanmJa M3J lP3 

Allhough revenge has been implicaled ina broatJ range 0/ antisocialand 
criminal acts, lhere has been liule psychologicaJ research on it. There 
is presently no scale measuring altitudes toward revenge in the pgycho(cid:173)
logicalliteralure. This nudy, involving 600 undergraduates, was de(cid:173)
signet!  to develop  and  validale  such  a  measure.  ScaJe  construction 
procedures were used thaJ took wo consideralion the assessment 01 
validity at all stages 01 scaJe development. The result was a 20 item 
Vengeance SeaJe with a Cronbach's alphIJ 0/ .92. Correlalions ofthe 
Vengeance  Scale with  the validating  measure of Trait Anger and a 
measure 01 empalhy were in lhe moderate range and in the predieted 
direclions .In addition, lhere were high signiftcant eorrelalions between 
lhe Vengeance Scale and self-report measures ofvengeful beh4viors. 
The scale appears tobe minimally contaminatedwith socilll desirability. 
The findings 01 face,  concurrent, and eonstruct validity  altesi to the .. 
valid;ty olthe measure. Test-retest reliability was .90. The Vengeance 
Scale ean provide a useful instrument lor the examination of individual 
differences in response to revenge-eliciting situaJions. 

Revenge is the infliction of harm in return for perceived wrong. It is 
frequently  cited as  a motivating  factor in  human  aggression.  Vengeful 
aggression has been implicated in a wide variety of illegal and antisocial 
acts  including  arson  (0' Sullivan  &  Kelleher,  1987),  rape  (ScuUy  & 
Marolla,  1985),  assault  (Ney,  1987),  vandalism  (WiesenthaI,  1990), 
homicide (porporino, Doherty & Sawatsky, 1987), shoplifting (Turner & 
Cashdon, 1988), and employee theft{Terris & Jones, 1982). Despite this, 
there is little psychological research on vengeance per se. Moreover, there 
presently  is  no  se ale  in  the  literature  to  measure  attitudes .toward  the 

Author3' Notes: This research was funded in part by the canadian Federation of University 
Women's Beverley Jackson Fellowship awarded to the tirst author. 
The authors thank Dr. Clary Lay aod Dr. Gonion Flett for their comments on earlier drafts 
of this paper. 
Requests for reprints should be sent to the second author. 
JournalolSocialBehaviorandPersoMlity, 1992, Vol. 7,No.l,2S-42. 
el992 Select Press 

Copyright (c) 2007 Pro Quest LLC 
Copyright (c) Select Press 

