Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 10 (2014) 93–103

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p : / / w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / d c n

Choosing not to act: Neural bases of the development of
intentional inhibition
Margot A. Schel a,b,∗, K. Richard Ridderinkhof c,d, Eveline A. Crone a,b

a Institute of Psychology, Leiden University, Leiden, the Netherlands
b Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), Leiden, the Netherlands
c Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
d Amsterdam Brain & Cognition (ABC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 19 March 2014
Received in revised form 21 July 2014
Accepted 12 August 2014
Available online 20 August 2014

Keywords:
Development
Response inhibition
Self-control
Volition
fMRI
Fronto-basal ganglia network

Choosing not to act, or the ability to intentionally inhibit your actions lies at the core of
self-control. Even though most research has focused on externally primed inhibition, an
important question concerns how intentional inhibition develops. Therefore, in the present
study children (aged 10–12) and adults (aged 18–26) performed the marble task, in which
they had to choose between acting on and inhibiting a prepotent response, while fMRI data
were collected. Intentional inhibition was associated with activation of the fronto-basal
ganglia network. Activation in the subthalamic nucleus and dorsal fronto-median cortex,
regions which have previously been associated with intentional inhibition, did not dif-
fer between intentional inhibition and intentional action. Even though both children and
adults intentionally inhibited their actions to a similar extent, children showed more acti-
vation in the fronto-basal ganglia network during intentional inhibition, but not in the
subthalamic nucleus and dorsal fronto-median cortex. Furthermore, a positive relation
between self-reported impulsivity and intentional inhibition was observed. These ﬁnd-
ings have important implications for our understanding of disorders of impulsivity, such as
ADHD, which are associated with poor self-control abilities.
© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC
BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

1. Introduction

Self-control abilities are of critical

importance for
successful functioning across the life span. A classical
experiment to test self-control is the marshmallow exper-
iment, a delay of gratiﬁcation test for preschool children
in which children can choose between one marshmallow
now or two marshmallows later (Mischel et al., 1989).

∗ Corresponding author at: Institute of Psychology, Leiden University,
Wassenaarseweg 52, 2333 AK Leiden, the Netherlands.
Tel.: +31 71 5276692.

E-mail address: mschel@fsw.leidenuniv.nl (M.A. Schel).

Studies with the marshmallow experiment have shown
that during the preschool ages there are large individual
differences in the ability to control the immediate impulse
to eat the ﬁrst marshmallow and wait for the second
marshmallow (Mischel et al., 1989) and experimental vari-
ations of this task have shown a developmental increase
in controlling immediate impulses between childhood
and adulthood (Christakou et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2013;
Scheres et al., 2006). These changes are accompanied by
neurodevelopmental changes. Recently, it has been shown
that individuals who were less able to delay gratiﬁcation
when they were preschoolers, showed poorer self-control
and reduced recruitment of the fronto-basal ganglia
network during a response inhibition task in adulthood
(Casey et al., 2011).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2014.08.006
1878-9293/© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/3.0/).

