Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726
DOI 10.1007/s11002-014-9294-1

Drink coca-cola, eat popcorn, and choose powerade:
testing the limits of subliminal persuasion

Laura Smarandescu & Terence A. Shimp

Published online: 14 May 2014
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract Research by marketing/advertising scholars has yielded anything but defin-
itive results when testing whether subliminal advertising is capable of persuading
consumers. Recent research in social cognition has provided impressive evidence that
subliminally priming brand names affects individuals’ attitudes, choices, and behaviors.
In the spirit of replication and boundary-condition testing, we conducted three studies
to examine whether subliminally priming brand names remains successful under more
realistic marketplace conditions. Study 1 pits an underdog brand against a market share
leader and demonstrates that subliminal priming significantly influences purchase
intentions when consumers are in an active thirst state. Study 2 examines the boundary
conditions of this effect on brand choice in a simulated store environment and also
obtains a significant priming effect when consumers are in an active thirst state.
However, this effect is nullified in study 3 that is structurally parallel to study 2 but
which adds a 15-min time delay between the prime and the choice task. The resultant
null effect questions the ability of subliminal priming to persuade consumers under
more realistic marketplace conditions.

Keywords Subliminal advertising . Priming . Persuasion . Motivation . Replication .
Boundary-condition testing

1 Introduction

The interrelated topics of subliminal perception, subliminal persuasion, and subliminal
advertising have long intrigued, provoked, and concerned all parties interested in
advertising and its impact—practitioners, the general public, policy makers, and
scholars. By way of distinction, subliminal perception refers to the awareness of stimuli

L. Smarandescu (*)
Iowa State University, 2350 Gerdin Building, Ames, IA 50011, USA
e-mail: smarand@iastate.edu

T. A. Shimp
Moore School of Business, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA

