Philosophy  and  Phenomenological  Research
Vol.  LXXIII, No. 1, July 2006

Is Incompatibilism Intuitive?

EDDY  NAHMIAS
Georgia State University

STEPHEN  G. MORRIS
Missouri  Western  State  University

THOMAS  NADELHOFFER
Dickinson College

JASON  TURNER
Rutgers University

Incompatibilists  believe  free  will  is  impossible  if  determinism  is  true,  and  they  often
claim  that  this  view  is  supported  by  ordinary  intuitions.  We  challenge  the  claim  that
incompatibilism is intuitive to most  laypersons  and  discuss  the  significance  of  this  chal-
lenge  to  the  free  will  debate.  After  explaining  why  incompatibilists  should  want  their
view  to  accord  with  pretheoretical  intuitions,  we  suggest  that  determining  whether
incompatibilism is in fact intuitive calls for empirical testing. We  then  present  the  results
of our studies, which put  significant  pressure  on  the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is  intui-
tive. Finally, we consider and respond to several potential objections to our approach.

Incompatibilists believe that the freedom associated with moral responsibility
is  impossible  if  determinism is  true,  and  they  often  claim  that  this  is  the
natural view to take given  that  it  is  purportedly supported by  ordinary intui-
tions. In this paper, we challenge the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is  intuitive
to  most  laypersons, and we discuss the  significance of  this  challenge to  the
free will  debate. In  doing so,  we first  argue that  it  is  particularly  important
for incompatibilists  that  their view of  free will  is  intuitive  given  that  it  is
more metaphysically demanding than compatibilist alternatives (ยง1). We then
suggest  that  determining whether incompatibilism  is  in  fact  intuitive  calls
for empirical testing  of  pretheoretical  judgments  about  relevant  cases  (ยง2).
We therefore carried out  some  empirical studies of  our  own,  and  the  results
put significant pressure on the claim that  incompatibilism  is  intuitive  to  the
majority of  laypersons (ยง3).  Having examined the  relevant data, we consider
several potential  objections  to  our  approach and show  why  they  fail  to  get
incompatibilists  off the  hook  (ยง4).  We conclude that  while  our  preliminary
data suggest that incompatibilism is not as intuitive  as  incompatibilists  have

28    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

