Psychological Review
2002, Vol. 109, No. 4, 646 – 678

Copyright 2002 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0033-295X/02/$5.00 DOI: 10.1037//0033-295X.109.4.646

Conditionals: A Theory of Meaning, Pragmatics, and Inference

P. N. Johnson-Laird

Princeton University

Ruth M. J. Byrne
University of Dublin

The authors outline a theory of conditionals of the form If A then C and If A then possibly C. The 2 sorts
of conditional have separate core meanings that refer to sets of possibilities. Knowledge, pragmatics, and
semantics can modulate these meanings. Modulation can add information about temporal and other
relations between antecedent and consequent. It can also prevent the construction of possibilities to
yield 10 distinct sets of possibilities to which conditionals can refer. The mental representation of a
conditional normally makes explicit only the possibilities in which its antecedent is true, yielding other
possibilities implicitly. Reasoners tend to focus on the explicit possibilities. The theory predicts the major
phenomena of understanding and reasoning with conditionals.

You reason about conditional relations because much of your
knowledge is conditional. If you get caught speeding, then you pay
a fine. If you have an operation, then you need time to recuperate.
If you have money in the bank, then you can cash a check.
Conditional reasoning is a central part of thinking, yet people do
not always reason correctly. The lawyer Jan Schlictmann in a
celebrated trial (see Harr, 1995, pp. 361–362) elicited the follow-
ing information from an expert witness about the source of a
chemical pollutant trichloroethylene (TCE):

P. N. Johnson-Laird, Department of Psychology, Princeton University;
Ruth M. J. Byrne, Department of Psychology, University of Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland.

This research was made possible in part by a grant to P. N. Johnson-
Laird from the National Science Foundation (Grant BCS 0076287) to study
strategies in reasoning. We thank Jon Baron and Ray Nickerson for their
helpful criticisms of an earlier version of this article. We thank Yingrui
Yang for providing technical help and advice, Patricia Barres for carrying
out Experiment 2, Rachel McCloy for carrying out a study of modus
tollens, Dan Zook for writing a preliminary version of the program for
pragmatic modulation, and David Over for engaging in many discussions
of philosophical theories of conditionals. We are also grateful to many
people: Peter Wason, now in retirement, for pioneering the psychological
study of conditionals; Jonathan Evans and David Over for a critique of our
account, which they presented at the Workshop on Mental Models in
Brussels, March 2001, and also for many discussions of conditionals; Luca
Bonatti, the late Martin Braine, Keith Holyoak, Howard Margolis, David
O’Brien, and Lance Rips for their vigorous criticisms of the model theory;
Monica Bucciarelli, Orlando Espino, Vittorio Girotto, Eugenia Goldvarg,
Paolo Legrenzi, Maria Sonino Legrenzi, Juan Garcı´a Madruga, Henry
Markovits, Mary Newsome, Cristina Quelhas, Sergio Moreno Rios, Carlos
Santamarı´a, Fabien Savary, Walter Schaeken, Walter Schroyens, Alessan-
dra Tasso, and Valerie Thompson for their collaboration in studies of
conditional reasoning. We are also grateful to the following individuals for
many useful ideas: Bruno Bara, Victoria Bell, David Green, Uri Hasson,
Mark Keane, Markus Knauff, Jim Kroger, Robert Mackiewicz, Hans-
Georg Neth, Tom Ormerod, Rosemary Stevenson, Dan Sperber, Vladimir
Sloutsky, and Jean-Baptiste van der Henst.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to P. N.
Johnson-Laird, Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Green
Hall, Princeton, New Jersey 08544. E-mail: phil@princeton.edu

If the TCE in the wells had been drawn from out of the river,

then there’d be TCE in the riverbed.
But there isn’t any TCE in the riverbed.

Schlictmann then argued that these premises were consistent with
the proposition that no contamination came from the river. What
he overlooked is that the conclusion is not merely consistent with
the premises but follows necessarily from them. Psychologists
disagree about the cause of such oversights and about conditional
reasoning in general (e.g., Braine & O’Brien, 1998; Cheng &
Holyoak, 1985; Johnson-Laird, 1986; Rips, 1983). Philosophers,
logicians, and linguists also disagree about the meaning of condi-
tionals (Adams, 1975; Lewis, 1973; Stalnaker, 1968). No consen-
sus exists about if.

Our concern is everyday conditionals, including all sentences of
the form If A then C or C if A, where A and C are declarative
clauses. Naive individuals can grasp the meaning of such asser-
tions, and they can use it to reason. The term naive refers here
merely to people who have not studied logic in any depth. In the
1970s, psychologists assumed that such individuals reason using
formal rules of inference like those of a logical calculus. The
challenge was to pin down the particular rules (e.g., Braine, 1978;
Johnson-Laird, 1975; Osherson, 1974 –1976). Such theorizing ne-
glected a discovery made by Wason (1966). Intelligent adults in
his selection task regularly committed a logical error. He laid out
four cards in front of them:

A B 2

3

They knew that each card had a letter on one side and a number on
the other side. He showed them a conditional: If a card has the
letter A on one side then it has the number 2 on the other side.
Their task was to select those cards that had to be turned over to
discover whether the conditional was true or false about the four
cards. Most people selected the A and 2 cards, or the A card alone.
They failed to select the 3 card. However, if the 3 has an A on its
other side, the conditional is false. Indeed, nearly everyone judges
it to be false in this case. Individuals also generate this case when
they are asked to make a conditional false (Oaksford & Stenning,
1992), and they judge that the probability of this case is zero given

646

