Why interest organizations do what they do:
Assessing the explanatory potential of ‘exchange’
approaches

Joost Berkhout
Department of Political Science, University of Amsterdam, Oudezijds Achterburgwal 237, 1012 DL,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Executive Summary Important parts of the literature on strategies of interest orga-
nizations consider the political activities of interest organizations as serving to build and
maintain exchange relationships between organizational representatives and constituents,
policymakers and the news media. The incentive for organizational survival produces
activities that links social and political domains. This review integrates various strands of
existing thinking on interest groups under an ‘exchange’ perspective. It produces a view
on interest organizations as being strategically strongly constrained through different
demands made on the organization when engaging in relationships with supporters, pol-
icymakers and journalists. While challenging, research designs should account for the
interrelated nature of these relationships rather than treating organizations as a strategi-
cally autonomous actors.
Interest Groups & Advocacy (2013) 2, 227–250. doi:10.1057/iga.2013.6;
published online 23 April 2013

Keywords: political organizations; interest organizations; social movement organiza-
tions; exchange theory; political strategies; lobbying

The online version of this article is available Open Access.

Why do interest organizations do what they do? A number of ‘classic’ and recent studies
evaluate these political activities as exchange relationships of interest organizations
with different parts of the organizational environment (for example, Salisbury, 1969;
Gamson and Wolfsfeld, 1993; Schmitter and Streeck, 1999; Bouwen, 2004). In this
review, I seek to connect the existing ‘exchange-inspired’ thinking on the mobilization
of members, the policy-related activities and outside-oriented strategies. I structure these
studies into a triangular scheme of exchanges by the interest organization with three
types of actors: (i) their supporters, (ii) political institutional actors and (iii) the news
media and other actors related to public opinion. These exchanges are governed by what
I label the logic of support, logic of inﬂuence and the logic of reputation.1

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414

Interest Groups & Advocacy Vol. 2, 2, 227–250

www.palgrave-journals.com/iga/

