The Role and Importance of 

for Chinese Outward Foreign Direct Investments

the Chinese Government

Philippe Gugler, University of Fribourg, Switzerland

Marc Fetscherin, Rollins College, United States

a
CHINESE OUTWARD FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENTS show 
strong positive trend over recent years and have attracted considerable
attention from academia and the business press. Many observers and
commentators express interest in the role the Chinese government
king of Chinese multinational

plays in the activities and decision-ma 

enterprises (MNEs) in connection with their foreign direct investments

(FOi).

. This article makes a contribution by investigating the relationship be-
tween the Chinese .government and MNEs in connection with their
oiJtward foreign direct investment (OFDI). We present a 2x2 matrix
where one dimension includes the interest (high/low) of the Chinese
government and the other the interest of MNEs (high/low). We argue
that, in market-seeking and strategic asset-seeking, bath interests are
aligned and high, while for effcency-seeking' motives Chinese come
pany interests are high but government interests are relatively low. In
regard to resource-seeking motives and balancing foreign currency re-
serves, Chinese government interests are high but company interests
relatively low. Our matrix allows us to understand the role and interests
king procéss as weil as
of the Chinese government in the decision-ma 
the relationships with Chinese companies in outward foreign direct in-
vestments.

Trends and Patterns in Chinese FDI

China's OFDls have shown a strong positive trend over recent years.
At the beginning of the 1990s, outfows were only marginal, at about
US$ 800  million (UNCTAD WIR 2009). But since 2003, Chinese OFOI
has demonstrated impressive growth, increasing from US$ 2.8 billion
in 2003 to US$ 52. billion in 2008 (UNCTAD WIR 2009: 53). However,
DI is c1early accelerating, it is still small by any relative
measure. In 2006, Chinese OFDI accounted for only 1.5 percent of the
ln 2008, China's share of world FOI reached 2.8 percent

while Chinese OF 

worlds total FOI. 

(UNCTAD WIR, 2009).

Most Chinese OFOls are in neighbouring Asian countries, especially

those in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) (MOF-
COM, 2008:67-68). China'sSpecíal Administrative Region, Hong Kong,
attracts by far the highest amount of OFDI. In 2008 it was the preferred
destination of 63 percent of Chinese OFDI (MOFCOM, 2008: 67). A sig-
nificant amount probably constitutes round-tripping investments or
investménts to offshore financial centres or to re-investments back to
China due to favorable tax situations in Hong Kong and other countries.

Therefore, Hong Kong and other offshore financíal centers are transit
points for Chinese ODFI that need ta be factored into the reported sta-
tistics and analyses.

Looking at Chinese FDI in terms of stock flows, leasing and business ser-
vices are the. most popular sectors, accounting for USS 54.5 billion, fol-
lowed by the financial sector (US$ 36.7 billion), wholesale and retailing
(USS 29.8 billion) and mining with US$ 22.8 billion in 2006 (MOFCOM,
2008: 80). The importance of the financíal sector may be i1lustrated by
the fact that, according to MOFCOM(Chinese Ministry of Commerce),
Chinese state-owned commercial banks had established 47 branch of-
fices, 31 affliated institutions and 12 representative offces in 19 coun-
tries in 2006, including the United States, Japan and Great Britarn (MOF-
COM, 2006: 51). Our data for this article are based mostly on offcial data
provided by MOFCOM, but some authors cite a lack of disclosure and
transparency in data sources about Chinese foreign direct investments
(see article from Derek Scissors in this issue).

The best way to understand the strategies of Chinese MNEs is to link
their preferred investment destinations with their maininvestment
sectors since a close relationship exists between the sectoral and geo-
1 ustrates that Chinese
graphical distribution of Chinese OFDI. .FigUre 1 il 
OFDI in the Middle East and Africa targets mainly extractive industries.
According to UNCTAD (2008), the Chinese government supports the
development of Chinese firms' activities in Africa, especially in sec-
tors such as energy and resource exploitation. OFDI in manufacturing
is prevalent in Eastern Europe (especíally transport equipment), Latin
America (mostly heavy industry) and Asia (electronics). Sales, market-
ing and support activities are generally performed in Western European
countries and in North America. International.mergers and acquisitions
are the primary mode of entry of Chinese firms in developed econo-
mies. However, Chinese firms have not yet invested heavily in manufac-
turing and sectors with high added value. As far as production activities,
transport is the key sector in Western Europe, while ICT plays an impor-
tant raie in North America.

Figure 1 suggests that Chinese MNEs follow a regionalization strategy
rather than a global one (Rugman & Doh, 2008: 134 ff.). The 12 larg-
est Chinese firms have the highest average percentage of intraregional
sales and assets. This observation is not specific to Chinese MNEs but
refers to most MNEs as Rugman (2008) found out (see also Sukpanich &
Rugman, 2009). This contrasts with the inference of the press that Chi-
nese OFOI is a global strategy led, or at least influenced, by the govern-
ment.

12

AIB Insights

Vol.  10, No.4

