11560 • The Journal of Neuroscience, September 16, 2009 • 29(37):11560 –11571

Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive

Decisions in Changing Conditions: The Urgency-Gating
Model

Paul Cisek, Genevie`ve Aude Puskas, and Stephany El-Murr
Groupe de Recherche sur le Syste`me Nerveux Central, De´partement de Physiologie, Universite´ de Montre´al, Montre´al, Que´bec H3C 3J7, Canada

Several widely accepted models of decision making suggest that, during simple decision tasks, neural activity builds up until a threshold
is reached and a decision is made. These models explain error rates and reaction time distributions in a variety of tasks and are supported
by neurophysiological studies showing that neural activity in several cortical and subcortical regions gradually builds up at a rate related
to task difficulty and reaches a relatively constant level of discharge at a time that predicts movement initiation. The mechanism
responsible for this buildup is believed to be related to the temporal integration of sequential samples of sensory information. However,
an alternative mechanism that may explain the neural and behavioral data is one in which the buildup of activity is instead attributable
to a growing signal related to the urgency to respond, which multiplicatively modulates updated estimates of sensory evidence. These
models are difficult to distinguish when, as in previous studies, subjects are presented with constant sensory evidence throughout each
trial. To distinguish the models, we presented human subjects with a task in which evidence changed over the course of each trial. Our
results are more consistent with “urgency gating” than with temporal integration of sensory samples and suggest a simple mechanism for
implementing trade-offs between the speed and accuracy of decisions.

Introduction
Research into the temporal aspects of decision making has pro-
vided support for a class of theories that may be called “se-
quential sampling,” or “bounded integrator” models (Stone,
1960; Laming, 1968; Ratcliff, 1978; Carpenter and Williams,
1995; Usher and McClelland, 2001; Wang, 2002; Mazurek et al.,
2003; Reddi et al., 2003; Smith and Ratcliff, 2004; Wong and
Wang, 2006; Bogacz and Gurney, 2007; Grossberg and Pilly,
2008). According to these models, simple decisions involve the
sequential sampling of the sensory stimulus and temporally inte-
grating the information present in that stimulus until a threshold
(or “bound”) is reached, at which point the decision is taken (see
Fig. 1A). The rate of this integration is related to the quality of
information present in the stimulus in favor of a given choice,
and the threshold is related to motivational factors such as payoff,
risk, and urgency (Reddi and Carpenter, 2000). Several variations
of bounded integrator models exist, and they offer a remarkably
successful account of behavior in simple decision tasks. In partic-
ular, assuming that the rate of integration is subject to variability,
these models can explain error rates and distributions of reaction
times (RTs) in a wide variety of tasks (Ratcliff, 1978; Carpenter
and Williams, 1995; Reddi and Carpenter, 2000; Reddi et al.,
2003; Smith and Ratcliff, 2004). Furthermore, recent neurophys-

Received April 15, 2009; revised June 30, 2009; accepted July 20, 2009.

This study was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, the EJLB Foun-
dation, the Faculty of Medicine summer student program (Universite´ de Montre´al), and an infrastructure grant from
Fonds de la Recherche en Sante´ du Que´bec. We thank Drs. Yoshua Bengio, Andrea Green, John Kalaska, Galen
Pickard, and David Thura, and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on this work.

Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Paul Cisek, De´partement de Physiologie, Universite´ de Montre´al, C.P.

6128 Succursale Centre-ville, Montre´al, QC H3C 3J7, Canada. E-mail: paul.cisek@umontreal.ca.

DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1844-09.2009
Copyright © 2009 Society for Neuroscience

0270-6474/09/2911560-12$15.00/0

iological data on decision tasks have provided evidence for accu-
mulation processes in the superior colliculus (Munoz and Wurtz,
1995; Munoz et al., 2000; Ratcliff et al., 2003, 2007; Shen and Pare´,
2007), the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) (Roitman and Shadlen,
2002; Leon and Shadlen, 2003), the frontal eye fields (Gold and
Shadlen, 2000, 2003), and the prefrontal cortex (Kim and
Shadlen, 1999). Finally, integration of samples toward a bound is
reminiscent of the “sequential probability ratio test” (SPRT)
(Wald, 1945; Bogacz et al., 2006), an optimal procedure for mak-
ing decisions on the basis of information that arrives over time
(Wald and Wolfowitz, 1948). Consequently, integrator models
are now widely accepted as an explanatory mechanism for deci-
sion making in many simple tasks.

However, in most of the studies supporting integrator models,
the information presented to subjects varied across trials but was
constant during the course of each trial. As described below, in
such conditions one cannot distinguish whether the buildup ob-
served in neural activity (and inferred from behavioral data) is
caused by temporal integration of sensory information or by a
growing signal related to elapsed time. It is therefore conceivable
that the neural and behavioral data from constant-information
tasks can be explained by an alternative model, in which neural
activity is the product of current stimulus information and a
growing signal related to the urgency for making a choice (see
Fig. 1 B). Although this model, which we call “urgency gating,”
behaves very similarly to integrator models in constant-information
tasks, it proposes a very different mechanism to explain neural
activity and behavior. To distinguish the models, we presented
human subjects with a decision task in which the information
favoring one choice over another changed during each trial.
Some of these results have previously been presented in abstract
form (Puskas et al., 2007; Cisek et al., 2008).

Cisek et al. • Decisions in Changing Conditions

J. Neurosci., September 16, 2009 • 29(37):11560 –11571 • 11561

Materials and Methods
Modeling formalism
Many variations of integrator models exist, but all may be formalized as
follows:

xi(t) ⫽ g冕

t

Ei(␶) d␶,

(1)

0

where xi(t) is a putative neural variable corresponding to choice i, g is a
scalar gain term, and Ei(␶) is some internal estimate of the sensory infor-
mation, present at time ␶, that constitutes evidence in favor of choice i.
The variable xi starts at some initial level xi(0) related to the previous
probability that choice i is correct and grows over time at a rate related to
the sensory evidence until it hits a threshold T, at which time the subject
commits to choice i. All integrator models share this basic set of assump-
tions. Where they differ is on how they define the evidence function Ei(t)
and on how they determine the time at which the decision is taken (the
“stopping rule”). For example, “independent race” models (Vickers,
1970) suggest that there exist separate variables xi(t) for each option, each
of which independently accumulates an estimate Ei(t) that is computed
solely on the basis of sensory information in favor of that option. When-
ever any of these independent processes reaches its threshold, the deci-
sion is made in favor of the corresponding option. In contrast, the
“diffusion” model (Stone, 1960; Laming, 1968; Ratcliff, 1978; Ratcliff et
al., 2003; Smith and Ratcliff, 2004) suggests that there is only a single
variable x(t), which accumulates E(t), which is defined as the difference
between sensory evidence for option A over option B. In other words,
E(t) ⫽ EA(t) ⫺ EB(t). The decision is taken when x(t) either grows above
a positive threshold ⫹T, selecting option A, or falls below a negative
threshold ⫺T, selecting option B. Another variant (Shadlen et al., 1996)
defines separate variables xA(t) and xB(t), each of which integrates inde-
pendent evidence, and uses a stopping rule based on the difference of
accumulated totals. Still another variant, called the “leaky competing
accumulator” model (Usher and McClelland, 2001), proposes separate
accumulators that mutually inhibit each other. Bogacz et al. (2006)
showed that, under reasonable parameter choices, most of these models
(with the exception of the independent race model) are functionally
equivalent to the diffusion model. Furthermore, the diffusion model is
formally equivalent to the SPRT and is very effective at reproducing
human behavior. Below, we consider four variations of integrator mod-
els, all based on diffusion, using different definitions of what is meant by
“sensory evidence.”

In addition to integrator models, we consider a different class of mod-
els, which are similar in that there is also a buildup of neural activity
toward a threshold, but the buildup is caused by a time-varying gain
(Ditterich, 2006), not by temporal integration. We call these urgency-
gating models, which can be expressed as follows:

xi(t) ⫽ g 䡠 Ei(t) 䡠 u(t),

(2)

where u(t) is some function of time that is not related to evidence for any
particular choice. This model (Fig. 1 B), suggests that neural activity xi(t)
is the product of the momentary evidence Ei(t) and a signal u(t), which
reflects the growing urgency to make a response (Ditterich, 2006;
Churchland et al., 2008). Although this model is very different from the
integrator models (1), the two can be shown to be mathematically equiv-
alent in the case of constant evidence tasks, as follows.

First, note that if Ei(t) is not a function of time, then it can be replaced
by a constant Ei within each trial. Because a constant can be moved
outside of an integral, Equation 1 can now be rewritten as follows:

xi(t) ⫽ g冕

t

Ei d␶⫽ g 䡠 Ei冕

t

d␶⫽ g 䡠 Ei 䡠 t.

(3)

0

0

Similarly, for the urgency-gating model, we can set Ei(t) to a constant and
simply set urgency proportional to elapsed time, u(t) ⫽ t, and so Equa-
tion 2 becomes the following:

xi(t) ⫽ g 䡠 Ei(t) 䡠 u(t) ⫽ g 䡠 Ei 䡠 t.

(4)

A

Stimulus onset

sensory 
evidence
B
sensory
evidence

urgency

E

∫

D

decision

Stimulus onset

E

u

D

decision

Figure 1.
Twoalternativemodelsofsimpledecisions.A,Theboundedintegratormodel,inwhich
sensory information (E) is integrated over time (兰) and compared with a threshold, resulting in a
decision (D). When evidence is strong (black lines), the buildup of activity in the neural integrator is
faster and produces a decision earlier in time than when evidence is weaker (gray lines). B, The
urgency-gating model, in which sensory information is multiplied by a growing signal related to the
urgencytorespond(u).Theproductofthesetwosignalscausesbuildupofactivitythat,asinA,isfaster
for strong evidence (black) than for weak evidence (gray).

To summarize, with the assumptions of constant evidence and linear
urgency growth, the integrator and urgency-gating models are equiva-
lent. Therefore, for any task that presents subjects with constant evidence
during each trial, the models make very similar predictions about neural
activity and behavior. In both, the neural variable grows at a rate propor-
tional to the subject’s estimate of the strength of evidence, and reaches
some threshold level of activity at the time the decision is made. In
Equation 1, the growth is attributable to integration of sensory evidence
over time (Fig. 1 A). In Equation 2, it is attributable to multiplication of
momentary evidence by a growing urgency to respond (Fig. 1 B). Because
both models propose a growth of activity at a rate proportional to evi-
dence, both make similar predictions about how sensory evidence influ-
ences neural activity, error rates, and reaction time distributions.

The above derivation of Equation 3 does not address the issue of noise.
However, it is clear that noise exists in the sensory signal as well as in the
internal processes of sensory transduction and computation of decision
variables. The presence of noise is one reason why temporal integration is
seen as essential for decision making. However, it is not the only option.
A low-pass filter can also deal with noise, without necessarily retaining all
properties of pure integration such as a long-lasting memory of past
states. Therefore, we propose that the estimate of momentary evidence
[Ei(t)] in the urgency-gating model is low-pass filtered before it is mul-
tiplied by the urgency signal.

In the context of the comparison between temporal integration and
urgency gating, it is useful to distinguish two kinds of noise in the deci-
sion process: (1) intratrial variability in Ei(t), which is attributable to
moment-to-moment neural activity fluctuations; and (2) intertrial vari-
ability in Ei, attributable to variations in levels of arousal, attention, etc.,
which are different from trial to trial but are relatively constant over the
course of each trial. Analyses of reaction time distributions using “recip-
robit plots” (Carpenter and Williams, 1995) suggest that the primary
cause of variability in reaction times is intertrial variability (differences in
arousal/attention) and that intratrial noise does not have a major impact
at the behavioral level. This makes sense because during each trial, the
brain can average across the uncorrelated activity fluctuations of many
thousands of neurons (Shadlen et al., 1996), but it cannot average over
changes in underlying baselines that vary between trials. Clearly, the
presence of intertrial noise in Ei does not affect the derivation of Equation
3 and affects both kinds of models identically. That is not the case for
intratrial noise, which results in a time-dependent noise distribution in
Equation 3 but a time-independent distribution in Equation 4. Never-
theless, we conjecture that, if intratrial noise is relatively weak (as sug-
gested by reciprobit plot analyses), and reaction times are relatively short,
then this difference will be too subtle to distinguish in data from exper-
iments that used constant-evidence tasks.

