and form the base conditions governing
representation in the various genres. The
phenomenology of the chronotope thus
constitutes a kind of formal horizon, in
which narrative temporality and spatial rela-
tions are mutually involved with chance
rather than logical consequence. In chron-
otopic analysis, according to Bakhtin, nei-
ther time nor space is privileged, as one or the
other often is in literary criticism; for him,
the two are always seen as interdependent.
An unusual aspect of Bakhtin’s view of
literary history is that he projects the novel
genre backward in time, ﬁnding novelistic
roots in both classical Greek and Roman
precursors. Bakhtin’s discussions of
the
interworkings of time, space, and funda-
mental principles such as causality in these
early literary narratives are fascinating and
suggestive. It is unfortunate, however, that
his exploration of the chronotope is illus-
trated by a number of obscure narratives for
which he is attempting, at the same time, to
establish an original generic status. On the
other hand, his innovations as a classicist,
bringing new attention to genres such as the
symposium and the Menippean satire, as
precursors of the novel, no doubt inﬂuenced
his development of the concepts of hetero-
glossia, dialogism, and polyphony in the
novel. But the idea of the chronotope, linked
as it is to ﬁctional genres, has provided
contemporary critics with a useful tool of
analysis that was not previously available.

SEE ALSO: Bakhtin, M. M.; Blanchot,
Maurice; Carnival/Carnivalesque;
Deconstruction; Derrida, Jacques; Marxism;
Other/Alterity; Phenomenology; Poulet,
Georges

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The Dialogic Imagination:
Four Essays (ed. M. Holquist; trans. C. Emerson

D I S C O U R S E 159

& M. Holquist). Austin: University of Texas
Press. (Original work published 1975.)

Bakhtin, M. M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky’s
Poetics (ed. and trans. C. Emerson). Minne-
apolis: University of Minnesota Press. (Original
work published 1929.)

Clark, K., & Holquist, M. (1984). Mikhail Bakhtin.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Holquist, M. (1990). Dialogism: Bakhtin and His

World. London: Routledge.

Morson, G. S., & Emerson, C. (1990). Mikhail
Bakhtin: Creation of a Prosaics. Stanford: Stan-
ford University Press.

Todorov, T. (1984). Mikhail Bakhtin: The Dialogical
Principle (trans. W. Godzich). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.

Discourse
YASSER MUNIF

The term “discourse” refers to a systematic
and relational sequence of meaningful state-
ments (speech and text) and semiotic ele-
ments (signs and symbols) that inﬂuence
practices and give expression to the values,
behaviors, and worldviews of social groups.
Historically, the concept was in use in the
sixteenth century to describe the practice
of speaking or writing at length about
a particular theme. In everyday language,
the term is often used casually to imply
a structured argument about a particular
theme. The modern genealogy of the con-
cept, however, goes back to the work of
Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure and
includes pre-eminent poststructuralist the-
orists like Michel Foucault. For mainstream
linguistics, highly indebted to Saussure, the
focus is on the analysis of the internal
mechanisms of language in use. In contrast,
according to the Foucauldian perspective,
which tends to be more inﬂuential in cul-
tural studies and literary theory, the empha-
sis is on examining the impact of discourse
on the social sphere.

In the 1900s, Ferdinand de Saussure
developed a linguistic theory that differed

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

160 D I S C O U R S E

signiﬁcantly from its predecessors. Al-
though the term “discourse” was not used
extensively in Saussure’s work, his theory
of language has had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on theories of discourse. Unlike his prede-
cessors, Saussure was not particularly inter-
ested in the diachronic approach to speciﬁc,
individual languages, that is, their historical
evolution; rather, he favored a synchronic or
structural analysis of linguistic systems. By
emphasizing structural (and thus universal)
aspects of language, Saussure does not deny
the importance of social norms and rules in
linguistic systems. Instead, his aim is to
examine the structure of language as a ﬁxed
system. He aspires to explain the rules that
connect
the different elements to each
other and give coherence to the system.
For Saussure, a language is a “series of
differences of sound combined with a series
of differences of
ideas” (Saussure 1981
[1916]: 120). According to this framework,
meaning emerges because there is a closed
taxonomy of signs that depends on a rela-
tional system of differentiation. Signs do not
have meaning by themselves; they acquire it
within a differential and relational system.
The idea of language as a system provided
the foundation for a conception of discourse
as systematic and relational.

as poststructuralist

The notion of discourse acquired new
meaning
theorists
attempted to solve some of the problems
that Saussure’s ideas raised. Julia Kristeva,
Roland Barthes, and the linguist Emile
Benveniste built on Saussurean linguistics
to show the importance of sociocultural
and intertextual dimensions of discourse.
Barthes’s contributions to a post-Saussur-
ean understanding of signiﬁcation includes
his innovative theory of mythic discourse
that focuses on the semiotic dimension of
cultural practices and reworks the Saussur-
ean framework (sign/signiﬁer/signiﬁed) to
show that there are two levels of signiﬁca-
tion: denotation and connotation. On the

signs

level of denotation, signiﬁcation is largely
descriptive and objective; a signiﬁer refers to
a signiﬁed. Denotative meaning tends to be
stable and referential and requires little in-
terpretive analysis; it is “commonsensical,”
as Barthes once thought, though he would
later distance himself from this position. On
the level of connotation, on the other hand,
signiﬁcation is largely suggestive and sub-
jective; meaning is variable, tending toward
abstraction or metaphoric displacements;
interpreting connotative
requires
greater
sensitivity to linguistic features
and to the social and cultural contexts of
their articulation. According to Barthes,
connotation occurs in the second order of
signiﬁcation, where the denotative, or ﬁrst
order, of
speciﬁc
cultural meanings through use. The second
order has obvious ideological implications,
for a dominant group can present a conno-
tative sign in the guise of a simple denotative
one. Cultural practice becomes hegemonic
when this process succeeds in the formation
of a myth, which is presented as truthful
to those inﬂuenced or governed by that
practice. Barthes’s Mythologies
(1972
[1957]) explores
the kinds of cultural
practices open to “mythic” transformation
and offers a theoretical explanation for the
process by which myth becomes a meta-
language with its own signifying system.

signiﬁcation acquires

Like Barthes, Benveniste believed that
accounting for context in the construction
of meaning was vital, especially with respect
to the social positions of the speaker (locu-
taire) and the hearer (allocutaire) as well as
the context in which conversations take
place. Discourse, in this view, is contrasted
to history: the latter represents a ﬁxed and
objective repository of past events where no
speaker is involved, while the former implies
a dialogue in the present tense between
a speaker and a hearer. Discursive utter-
ances, as opposed to historical utterances,
are the product of intersubjective social acts.

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

