Vol. 144, No. 2  ·  Research article

Slum  tourism  in  the  context  of  the 
tourism and poverty (relief) debate

Fabian Frenzel1

1 School of Management, University of Leicester, University Road, Leicester LE1 7RH, England, ff48@le.ac.uk

Manuscript submitted: 31 May 2012  /  Accepted for publication:  11 July 2013   /  Published online: 19 November 2013

Abstract
The  paper  examines  the  role  of  slum  tourism  in  poverty  relief.  To  do  so,  it  surveys  the  state-of-the-art  literature  on 
tourism  and  poverty  and  investigates  the  ways  in  which  slum  tourism  research  relates  to  this  literature.  Slum  tou-
rism  research  has  addressed  the  question  of  how  the  poor  may  benefit  from  this  practice;  however,  these  efforts 
have  not  systematically  considered  the  general  debate  on  tourism  and  poverty  relief.  The  survey  of  slum  tourism 
 re  search  also  contributes  to  the  conceptual  development  of  the  tourism-poverty  nexus.  The  predominant  choice  of  ap-
proaches  in  this  field  relies  on  quantitative  indicators  of  poverty  relief,  but  these  do  not  sufficiently  account  for  the 
 multi -dimensional  character  of  poverty.  The  study  of  slum  tourism  research  points  to  the  multi-dimensional  valorisa-
tion  of  poverty  in  tourism  which  is  an  aspect  often  overlooked  in  the  state-of-the-art  research  on  tourism  and  poverty.

Zusammenfassung

Der Artikel untersucht die Rolle des Slumtourismus bei der Armutsbekämpfung. Dazu wird der Stand in der 
Li teratur zum Thema Tourismus und Armut dargestellt und überprüft, inwieweit sich die Forschung zu Slum­
tourismus auf diese Literatur bezieht. Die Slumtourismusforschung hat zwar die Frage aufgeworfen, in welcher 
Weise die Armen von dieser Aktivität profitieren, jedoch wurde dabei die allgemeine Diskussion zu Tourismus und 
Armut nicht systematisch berücksichtigt. Der Überblick über die Slumtourismusforschung trägt darüber hinaus 
auch zur Weiterentwicklung des Konzepts ‚Tourismus und Armut‘ bei. Die vorherrschenden Ansätze auf diesem 
Gebiet gründen sich auf quantitative Armutsindikatoren, diese werden jedoch dem mehrdimensio nalen Charakter 
von Armut nicht gerecht. Die Untersuchung der Slumtourismusforschung verweist auf die viel schichtige Inwert­
setzung von Armut durch Tourismus, ein häufig übersehener Aspekt in der Literatur zu Tou rismus und Armut. 
Keywords      Slum tourism, poverty, poverty alleviation
to poverty relief. Slum tourism promoters, tour provi­
ders as well as tourists claim that this form of tour­
Slum tourism is on the rise across the developing 
ism contributes to development in slums by creating a 
variety of potential sources of income and other non­
world and it remains a contentious and much­debated 
leisure practice. While critics maintain that visiting 
material benefits. In line with these assessments and 
slums is voyeuristic (see Butler 2012 for an overview 
on the basis of similar arguments local governments 
of the arguments), proponents often link slum tourism 
in more developed slum tourism locations encourage 
Frenzel, Fabian 2013: Slum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate. – DIE ERDE 144 (2): 117­128

1.   Introduction

DOI: 10.12854/erde­144­9

117

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013DIE ERDEJournal of the Geographical Society of BerlinSlum tourism in the context of the tourism and poverty (relief) debate

and support slum tourism as a development strategy. 
In the ethical debates on slum tourism, its apparent 
economic benefit is most frequently evoked. In this ar­
gument, slum tourism proponents tap into the claim 
that tourism can be a solution to underdevelopment 
and poverty, a view that sees tourism as a moderni­
sation strategy for least developed (LDC) and develo­
ping countries (DC). In the last 40 years, however, such 
arguments have been frequently contested and critics 
have pointed to the limits of tourism as a development 
and anti­poverty strategy (Scheyvens 2007, 2011; Hall 
2007). In the most comprehensive review of the de­
bate to date, Scheyvens (2011) concludes that a care­
ful evaluation of specific initiatives needs to  replace 
earlier generalisations. She warns against a blanket 
assumption of the use and usefulness of tou rism as a 
development strategy. In academic reflections on slum 
tourism there have been multiple  attempts to evaluate 
its potential to relieve poverty; however, both a link to 
existing debates in the broader tourism field as well as 
a synthesis of the approaches is lacking.
The purpose of this paper is to address this deficit by 
surveying existing research of slum tourism’s role in 
poverty relief in the context of broader discussions on 
tourism and poverty. Slum tourism has grown signifi­
cantly over the last 30 years both in size and range of 
destinations, however it remains a niche form of tou­
rism in comparison to overall tourism in LDC and DCs. 
Despite this niche character in proportional terms, I 
argue that slum tourism offers specific insights into 
the study of tourism and poverty because slum tou­
rism has a special relationship to poverty. This is pre­
dominantly so because in slum tourism poverty is not 
just a more or less accidental condition of the locale. 
Rather, poverty itself becomes the main attraction of 
the destination and is central to the discourses that 
constitute the slum tourism experience (Rolfes 2009; 
Meschkank 2010;  Dyson 2012). The perspectives on 
poverty relief in slum tourism differ to those in other 
forms of tourism in LDC and DC. These differences 
include the much­observed paradox about slum tour­
ism and poverty alleviation: If slum tourism was a 
 successful strategy for poverty mitigation, would it not 
undermine its own premise (Steinbrink et al. 2012)? 
More questions arise: As people pay to see poverty, 
poverty becomes a commodity (Freire-Medeiros  2009) 
and is valorised (Rolfes 2009). What implications does 
this have for the social construction of poverty in 
slum tourism? Is slum tourism in some way rendering 
poverty into something valuable? Is poverty norma­
lised and made acceptable in slum tourism? Does slum 
118

tourism perhaps deal with the problem of poverty by 
making poverty unproblematic? Such negative assess­
ments are set against more positive ones. 
Slum tourism does not occur in all poor areas of the 
world, but develops under very specific conditions, 
and the study of these conditions is one of the key 
questions for slum tourism research (Frenzel 2012). 
One of these conditions seems to be linked to pio­
neering visits to slums by justice tourists (Scheyvens 
2002). Events of political tourism of the global justice 
movement ( Higgins-Desbiolles 2008, 2009b) triggered 
slum tourism development in three of its mayor glob­
al destinations, in the townships of South Africa, in 
Rio de Janeiro and in Nairobi in Kenya (Frenzel 2012). 
Does slum tourism arise from visits by political tour­
ists interested in pursuing global justice and equity? 
Do its political roots remain as justice tourism de­
velops into a broader consumer leisure practice of 
slum tourism in some destinations? These questions 
about the political nature of slum tourism point to 
an important and yet generally overlooked aspect 
of the ‘tourism and poverty nexus’ (Scheyvens 2011), 
namely that poverty is a political problem. Defini­
tions of poverty differ greatly between approaches. 
Poverty is defined as absolute or relative, as material 
or as multi­dimensional, to mention the most impor­
tant perspectives. These definitions in the literature 
 relate to how poverty (and therefore poverty relief) is 
identified and measured and what results such meas­
ures produce. Poverty is also socially constructed as 
a problem, and the specific ways in which the prob­
lem is constructed open up a space for fierce politi­
cal debates. Poverty alleviation today is a universal 
aim, an enshrined ethical and political target across 
the world regardless of context and situation. At the 
same time, poverty appears to result from economic 
and political arrangements that are broadly defended 
and supported. Poverty alleviation is therefore also 
a political question, with a discursive history as the 
‘social question’ (Arendt 2006) that is increasingly 
debated on a global scale (Frenzel 2012). 
Tourism studies’ approaches to poverty and poverty 
relief have to be understood in the context of this com­
plex debate (Scheyvens 2011). In this paper I firstly 
review the state­of­the­art literature on tourism and 
poverty relief. This review is structured along the later 
questions for the review of research on slum tourism 
and poverty relief, namely what conceptions of poverty 
are considered and how poverty is quantitatively as­
sessed. Moreover, I ask to what extent poverty is un­

DIE ERDE · Vol. 144 · 2/2013