Cellular Microbiology (2007) 9(7), 1834–1850

doi:10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.00919.x
First published online 26 March 2007

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 encodes a giant
non-ﬁmbrial adhesin and the cognate type 1
secretion system

Roman G. Gerlach,1 Daniela Jäckel,1
Bärbel Stecher,2 Carolin Wagner,1 Andrei Lupas,3
Wolf-Dietrich Hardt2 and Michael Hensel1*
1Institut für Klinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und
Hygiene, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, D-91054 Erlangen,
Germany.
2Institut für Mikrobiologie, ETH Zürich, Switzerland.
3MPI für Entwicklungsbiologie, Tübingen, Germany.

Summary

Pathogenicity Islands play a major
role in the
pathogenesis of infections by Salmonella enterica.
The molecular function of Salmonella Pathogenicity
Island 4 (SPI4) is largely unknown, but recent work
indicated a role of SPI4 for Salmonella pathogenesis
in certain animal models. We analysed the virulence
functions of SPI4 and observed that SPI4 is contrib-
uting to intestinal inﬂammation in a mouse model. On
a cellular level, SPI4 mediates adhesion to epithelial
cells. We demonstrate the function of SPI4-encoded
proteins as a type I secretion system (T1SS) and
identify SiiE as the substrate protein of the T1SS.
SiiE is secreted into the culture medium but med-
iates contact-dependent adhesion to epithelial cell
surfaces. SiiE is a very large non-ﬁmbrial adhesin
of 600 kDa and consists of 53 repeats of Ig domains.
Our study describes the ﬁrst T1SS-secreted protein
that functions as a non-ﬁmbrial adhesin in binding
to eukaryotic cells. The SPI4-encoded T1SS and
SiiE might functionally resemble the type I ﬁmbrial
adhesins.

Introduction

The acquisition of virulence functions encoded by genes
within pathogenicity islands is considered as the major
driving force in the evolution of the gastrointestinal patho-
gen Salmonella enterica (Groisman and Ochman, 1997;
Marcus et al., 2000). Two hallmarks of the pathogenesis
of Salmonella infections are directly linked to genes
within Salmonella Pathogenicity Islands (SPI) (reviewed

Received 24 November, 2006; revised 19 January, 2007; accepted 22
January, 2007. *For correspondence. E-mail hensel@mikrobio.med.
uni-erlangen.de; Tel. (+49) 9131 8523640; Fax (+49) 9131 8522531.

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

in Hensel, 2004). SPI1 encodes a type III secretion
system (T3SS) for the translocation of effector proteins by
extracellular Salmonella into eukaryotic host cells. This
translocation ultimately triggers invasion, i.e. the uptake of
Salmonella by non-phagocytic cells (Schlumberger and
Hardt, 2006). The SPI1-T3SS is also involved in the elici-
tation of gastrointestinal
inﬂammation (for reviews, see
Wallis and Galyov, 2000; Hapfelmeier and Hardt, 2005).
S. enterica is a facultative intracellular pathogen that
survives and proliferates within a membrane-bound
organelle within host cells termed ‘Salmonella-containing
vacuole’ or SCV. The function of a second T3SS encoded
by SPI2 is required for ablating host cell defence mecha-
nisms and for the modiﬁcation of host cell
transport
processes (Kuhle and Hensel, 2004). Genes encoding
effector proteins are located within SPI1 and SPI2, but
are also present on various loci scattered over
the
chromosome. Two genes, each encoding an effector for
the SPI1-T3SS and SPI2-T3SS, are located within SPI5.
SPI3 genes contribute to the intracellular phenotype by
encoding a high-affinity Mg2+ uptake system required to
adapt to the nutritional limitations in the SCV. There is also
evidence that the SPI3-encoded autotransporter protein
MisL functions as a non-ﬁmbrial adhesin during intestinal
colonization (Dorsey et al., 2005).

SPI4 has typical characteristics of SPI; however, the
molecular
function of SPI4-encoded proteins is not
known. The initial description of SPI4 suggested the pres-
ence of 18 open reading frames (ORFs) (Wong et al.,
1998). A reﬁned analysis based on the genome sequence
of S. Typhimurium, however, showed that only six ORFs
are present
in SPI4 (McClelland et al., 2001; Morgan
et al., 2004). The role of SPI4 in Salmonella pathogenesis
has been unclear, but a recent study using signature-
tagged mutagenesis identiﬁed SPI4 as a colonization
factor during infection of calf
(Morgan et al., 2004).
However, this study did not indicate a role of SPI4 during
orogastral
infection of chicken, suggesting SPI4 as a
determinant of host speciﬁcity. A recent screen for Salmo-
nella mutant strains attenuated in a model for long-term
persistence identiﬁed a strain defective in SPI4 genes
(Lawley et al., 2006).
In competition experiments with
wild-type (WT) S. Typhimurium, a SPI4-deﬁcient strain
was slightly attenuated in long-term persistence.

In addition to T3SS encoded by SPI and the translo-
cated effector proteins, adhesins are known virulence
determinants of Salmonella. There is a large number of
operons encoding ﬁmbrial adhesins but the role in patho-
genesis has only been partially understood and analysis
is complicated by the redundancy of ﬁmbrial adhesins. As
many as 13 operons encoding putative ﬁmbrial adhesins
have been predicted from the S. Typhimurium genome
sequence and expression of 11 of these operons has
been demonstrated (Humphries et al., 2003). In addition
three non-ﬁmbrial adhesins have been described. MisL
(Dorsey et al., 2005) and ShdA (Kingsley et al., 2002) are
members of the autotransporter family and BapA was
recently characterized as an adhesin for homotypic inter-
actions during bioﬁlm formation (Latasa et al., 2005).
While non-ﬁmbrial adhesins are usually secreted by
the autotransporter mechanisms (also known as type V
secretion), ﬁmbrial adhesins use the general secretion
pathway for the transport of subunits that are subse-
quently assembled by speciﬁc pathways (reviewed in
Soto and Hultgren, 1999).

During our ongoing systematic functional analyses of
newly described pathogenicity islands of S. enterica, we
observed a virulence defect of SPI4-deﬁcient bacteria
speciﬁcally during interaction with polarized epithelial
cells. This observation prompted us to study the function
of genes within SPI4 in more detail. We set out to inves-
tigate the role of SPI4 in Salmonella virulence using
reﬁned cell culture and infection models. Our data dem-
onstrate that SPI4 encodes a novel member of the family
of large, repetitive non-ﬁmbrial adhesins and a cognate
type I secretion system (T1SS) for the secretion of this
adhesin.

Results

SPI4 function is not required for invasion of HeLa cells
or intracellular replication

To investigate the role of SPI4 in virulence, we ﬁrst applied
routinely used cell culture infection models. The effect of a
deletion of SPI4 on host cell invasion was analysed using
the gentamicin protection assay with the human epithelial
cell line HeLa. A strain with a defect in the SPI1-encoded
T3SS was about 500-fold reduced in invasion of HeLa
cells (Fig. S1A), but strains deﬁcient in the SPI2-T3SS or
lacking the entire SPI4 locus did not show a reduced
invasion. The intracellular replication in RAW264.7, a
murine macrophage-like cell line was also investigated.
The intracellular replication of S. Typhimurium WT, the
SPI1- and SPI4-deﬁcient strains was not signiﬁcantly
different. In contrast, a mutant strain deleted in the SPI2-
encoded T3SS showed highly reduced intracellular repli-
cation (Fig. S1B). These data indicate that SPI4 does not

Salmonella Pathogenicity Island 4 1835

contribute to Salmonella invasion of the epithelial cell line
HeLa and intracellular
replication in macrophage-like
cells.

SPI4 function is not required for pathogenesis in a
murine typhoid fever model

The systemic pathogenesis of a SPI4 deletion strain was
compared with that of the WT and previously character-
ized mutant strains deﬁcient in SPI2 function. Cohorts of
C57BL/6 mice were orally infected with approximately
5 ¥ 109 colony-forming units (cfu), and the bacterial
burden was determined at 3 and 5 days after infection. As
expected from previous reports, a SPI2-deﬁcient strain
was incapable of proliferating in liver, spleen, mesenteric
lymph nodes (MLN) or Peyer’s Patches (PP) and the
bacterial burden remained at a low level. In contrast,
Salmonella WT replicated in these organs and high bac-
terial burdens developed. The kinetics of systemic prolif-
eration of the SPI4 mutant strain was comparable with
that of WT Salmonella and mice had to be sacriﬁced at
day 5 due to the development of the severe systemic
infection (Fig. 1A). Based on these results, SPI4 does not
appear relevant for the development of systemic infec-
tions in the murine model. This observation, however, is in
contrast to the report by Morgan et al. (2004) who found a
reduced systemic colonization of BALB/c mice after oral
infection with siiE and siiF strains that are defective in a
large repetitive protein and a putative subunit of a T1SS
respectively. These disparate results may be due to the
different infectious dose applied here and by Morgan et al.

SPI4 contributes to gastrointestinal inﬂammation in the
murine colitis model

We investigated the possible role of SPI4 in the interaction
of Salmonella with the intestinal mucosa (Fig. 1B). Intes-
tinal inﬂammation is usually not induced by S. Typhimu-
rium infection of mice. However, a recently developed
model system of caecal
inﬂammation in streptomycin-
pretreated mice allows the analysis of intestinal symp-
toms caused by Salmonella infection (Barthel et al., 2003)
and was applied for our study (Hapfelmeier and Hardt,
2005). Oral infection with WT Salmonella caused severe
caecal inﬂammation, as quantiﬁed by histological scoring
of oedema, PMN inﬂux, loss of goblet cells and epithelial
damage. A mutant strain deﬁcient in the function of the
SPI1-encoded T3SS caused highly reduced caecal
inﬂammation. The pathological scores observed after
infection with the SPI4-deﬁcient strain were signiﬁcantly
reduced, but inﬂammation caused by the SPI4 strain was
more severe than caused by the SPI1 strain (Fig. 1B;
Fig. S2). The colonization of the caecum, liver, spleen and
ileal lymph nodes was comparable after infection with all

© 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Cellular Microbiology, 9, 1834–1850

