Society for Cinema & Media Studies

Sitcoms and Single Moms: Representations of Feminism on American TV
Author(s): Lauren Rabinovitz
Source: Cinema Journal, Vol. 29, No. 1 (Autumn, 1989), pp. 3-19
Published by: University of Texas Press on behalf of the Society for Cinema & Media Studies
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1225298 .
Accessed: 02/08/2013 07:53

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

University of Texas Press and Society for Cinema & Media Studies are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Cinema Journal.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Sitcoms and Single Moms: Representations of 
Feminism on American TV 
by Lauren Rabinovitz 

Among American broadcast television practices, the situation comedy constructed 
around a single white career woman or mother emerged in the 1970s as a preferred 
fictional site for a "feminist" subject position. Such examples as The Mary Tyler 
Moore Show, One Day at a  Time, and Alice are representative of the television 
industry's attempt to  draw upon feminist consciousness raising as a contextual 
frame. Popular critics frequently agree that "Mary" symbolized the independent 
woman of  the  1970s.'  Some critics have actually gone  so far as to  claim that 
Alice's subliminal message is  "Sisterhood Is  Powerful" or that One  Day  at  a 
Time is about television's "first feminist."2 Periodicals aimed exclusively at female 
audiences (including Ms., Vogue, McCalls, Glamour, and Working Woman) have 
cited Alice, One Day  at  a  Time, and  The Mary Tyler Moore Show (MTM) as 
exemplary feminist representations, and have particularly hailed Kate & Allie as 
the  progressive outcome  of  such  a  continuous line.3 These  TV  shows  make 
feminism meaningful (as cultural values and social practice) only within the ways 
that past and present sitcoms, television's general representation of women, and 
topical  issues admit  and  circulate notions of  feminism.  The  genre's political 
feminism must also conform to American television's material base, a governing 
system of  economic  exchange that functions to  renegotiate sociopolitical "dif- 
ference" as a cultural affirmation of patriarchal values. The sitcom of the  1970s 
and 1980s thus offers a reformist or liberal feminism as "progressive" even while 
it simultaneously works to disavow it. 

Television scholars have  already identified the  ways  in  which  particular 
television  texts identified as  "feminist" redirect independent, assertive female 
characters into safely traditional female categories. Arguing that central female 
characters must be  returned ultimately to the conventional narrative structures 
of family melodrama or heterosexual romance, critics have demonstrated that a 
woman's position can only be inscribed narratively in relationship to male pre- 
rogatives. For example, Serafina Bathrick notes how the  narrative trajectory of 
The  Mary  Tyler Moore Show  textually repositions Mary-the 
single,  profes- 
sionally minded  independent  woman-into  romantic or familial categories so 
that  she  emerges  as  a  self-sacrificing, nurturant figure of  True  Womanhood.4 
Robert Deming  agrees that while  MTM "might have opened up a new  repre- 
Lauren Rabinovitz is an assistant professor of Communication Studies and American 
Studies at the University of Iowa. Her book, Points of Resistance: Women, Power and 
Politics in the New York Avant-Garde Cinema, 1943-1971, is forthcoming from Uni- 
versity of Illinois Press. 
?  1989 Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois 

Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989  3 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

