f-*---J nrr-liii.T;1 An Introduction to the Analysis of Drama 
Suit the action to the word, the word  to the action, with this special observance, that 
you o'erstep not the modesty of nature. For  anything so o'erdone is from the purpose of 
playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is to hold as 'twere the mirror up 
to nature. 
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, Hamlet, III,  ii, 17-22. 
#)  A Text Written for Performance: Fundamental Features 

of Dramatic Composition 

i

~

~

~

 

~

i

~

~

~
l
bemeen 
text arid 

h

Aims and 
content of 
this chapter 

When, in the Passage quoted above, Hamlet advises the actors 
~
performing the play within a play in Hamlet to coordinate word 
and action, language and gesture, he highlights the close relation- 
ship between the written  text of  a  drama and its performance 
in the theatre. Hamlet's comment that the first and ultimate goal 
of acting is "to hold [...I  the mirror up to nature" is admittedly his- 
torically determined and based on a particular conception of lit- 
erature as imitation of nature; however, his reference to the inter- 
play between word and gesture alludes to a central aspect of the 
theory of  drama  and identifies two  important  components of 
drama. 
The main goal of this chapter is to identify the fundamental fea- 
tures of the composition of drama, to give a preliminary overview 
of  some of  the fundamentals of  the  analysis  of  drama and to 
introduce the most important categories and transferable meth- 
ods of drama analysis. Beginning with the tension between drama 
and theatre, we will examine some constitutive features of  dra- 
matic texts. Following this, a  communication model for drama 
will be developed that also takes into account the specificities of 
the theatrical context. A short introduction will then be given to 
the basics of a semiotics of theatre, which has increased awareness 
of the part played by non-verbal theatrical codes. The remainder 
of the chapter will be devoted to a Summary of the most important 
terms and models used to describe the various elements and struc- 
tures of dramatic texts. 
Dramatic texts differ from other literary genres in their commu- 
~h~ dra- 
mat;c text  as  nication situation. It is important to remember that, in contrast 
to an essay or a poem, a dramatic text is not primarily written to 
script arid 
be read, but rather as a script for a theatre performance. Dramas 
the 
are therefore texts that are written to be performed as plays, and 
this performance  requires not only a  script, but also the entire 

Theatre per- 
formances 
as rnultirne- 
dial forms of 
presentation 

apparatus of theatre production, which often includes consider- 
able resources in terms of personnel and organisation. 
It is true that dramatic texts are generally written by an author and 
read by individual recipients; however, when a play is performed, 
the communication  situation  is entirely  different. Several indi- 
vidual~ (for example, director, dramatic advisor, set-designers and 
actors/actresses) are involved in the production of a play; perform-  tion 
ances are usually attended by large audiences. This phenomenon 
is referred to as "[tlhe collective nature of production  and reception" 
(PFISTER 1988: 11). The few dramas that are produced primarily as 
reading material do not change the fact that watching, and not 
reading, is the most appropriate mode of reception for drama. 
The process of  preparing  a drama for performance represents a 
form of literary adaptation, in that it involves substituting another 
medium for the literary text (see chapter 6.3.). While dramatic 
texts only exist in written form, theatre performances use non- 
verbal as well as verbal modes of communication: the theatrical 
realisation of a dramatic text involves an acoustic (voices, noises, 
music) and an optical dimension (set, presentation of the charac- 
ters, gesture, facial expression), as well as occasionally engaging 
other modes of sensory perception. We can describe a theatre per- 
formance as a "multimedial form ofpresentation" (PFISTER 1988: 6), 
because the performance of a play draws on a wide repertoire of 
verbal and non-verbal signs and codes, as well as on a variety of 
modes of perception or communication channels. 
Drama and theatre are therefore closely related; the dramatic text 
lnteraction 
functions as the script on which a performance is based. Given  bemeen 
that text and performance are valued equally as artistic works, it  drama arid 
is perhaps most appropriate to regard the dramatic text "as a text 
theatre 
to be performed, as a literary artefact conceived with a view to its per- 
formance" (HOFELE 1991: l l). This avoids ascribing greater value 
to either text or performance, and instead does justice to both as 
distinct modes or media of artistic expression. 
As  many features of a dramatic work can be varied in perform-  Variations in 
ance and the actors generally have considerable scope for indi- 
vidual interpretation, every performance should be regarded as  „d  produc- 
an independent 'theatrical work of art'. A comparison of the var-  tion 
ious performances of any individual drama illustrates this capac- 
ity for variation, which affects in particular the presentation  of 
characters, gesture and setting, whereas the outlines of the action 
and the temporal structure of a drama tend to be prescribed  by 
the text. Theatre performance differs in various ways from drama 
as written text, the most obvious difference being that the perform- 
ance is a transient event that can never be exactly reproduced. 

I 

1  An lntroduction to the Analysis of  Drama 

A Text Written for  Performance: Fundamc.ril,il Fra1iirc.t ol Drnni,illc  Cc,i~i~otllloii 7'1 

Theatre 
studies vs. 
English 
literary 
studies 

Although theatre studies and English and American literary stud- 
ies are both concerned with the broad field of drama and theatre, 
their objectives and methods differ  considerably. Since theatre 
studies became established as a n  independent discipline, the fol- 
lowing distinction between the two disciplines has become widely 
accepted: theatre studies focuses primarily on the 'theatrical work' 
or the 'theatrical text', i. e. on the various aspects of the perform- 
ance and production of plays in a theatre. It is therefore primarily 
concerned with the analysis of actual performances on the basis 
of a semiotics of theatre (See chapter 4.3.). English and American 
literary studies, on the other hand, are concerned primanly with 
the analysis and interpretation  of  dramas as printed texts, and 
thus focus particularly on the written sources of theatre perform- 
ances, on the generic characteristics of dramatic texts, and on the 
interpretation  and thematic as well as formal characteristics of 
individual dramas. 

performance  Since the 1980s, however, interpretative approaches that are con- 
cerned primarily with performance and known as 'perforrnance 
criticism 
criticism' have gained in currency within English literary studies. 
Performance  criticism  encompasses  a  variety  of  approaches, 
which focus primarily on the 'implied production' already inher- 
ent within a dramatic text, or on the analysis of actual perform- 
ances. Thus drama is analysed with a view to its production poten- 
tial. ANDREAS HOFELE (1991: 18f.) describes the "irnpliedperforrnance 
[. . .] as the ensernble of instructions that a drarna offers for its produc- 
tion: the pointer that is written into the drarnatic text towards the 'text' 
that is to be produced  - the text of the perforrnance - but not towards 
the perforrnance itself". 

stage forms  The character of each theatre production is determined to a large 
degree by the individual  stage form, which  also influences  the 
audience's  experience of  the  production,  the  distance between 
actors and audience and the acting style. In Ancient Greece, plays 
were performed in amphitheatres, closer in terms of size to today's 
football Stadiums than to our modern play-houses. The audience 
sat in a semicircle around the stage, and the lack of stage Set and 
the  distance  from  the  audience  made a  realistic  performance 
impossible.  Theatre  in Shakespearean times,  by  contrast,  was 
characterised by close contact between the actors and the audi- 
ence, with the audience packed closely on various levels around 
three sides of  the stage. The stage and the seating were 'lit'  by 
natural daylight, and the Set was minimal, thus encouraging the 
audience to use their imagination to embellish what they saw. 
Certainly, the physical features of Shakespearean theatre were not 
conducive to a realistic imitation of reality. Today's most common 
stage form with its box-like structure, lighting, curtains and other 

7H 

JJ 

An lntroducllon to the Analysis of  Drama 

props is far more suited to the creation of aesthetic illusion. The 
actors can act as if an invisible 'fourth wall' separated events on 
stage from the audience. However, the experimentation with stage 
forms that is common in today's theatre, and that frequently harks 
back to old models, is indicative of  dissatisfaction with this con- 
vention. 

A Communication Model for Dramatic Texts: 
Special Features of Theatre Communication 

As we saw in our examination of  the dramatic genre, the com-  ~ommu,.,ica~ 
munication Situation of a dramatic text is fundamentally differ-  tion struc- 
ent from that of a lyric text. Admittedly, in the case of both genres  ture of lyric 
a  distinction  can  be  made  between  external  communication  „d  dra- 
involving the historical author and recipient, and communication  matic texts 
within the text.  However, in addition to the collective nature of 
the production and reception of theatre performance (and also of 
film), there are significant differences between the internal com- 
munication Situations of dramatic and lyric texts. 
A communication  model  for drama enables us to represent  in 
commu- 
graphic form some of the main differences between dramatic texts 
,iCation 
and other literary genres. This communication model highlights  model for 
three main communicative peculiarities of dramatic texts: firstly,  dramatic 
on  an internal  level,  dramas  comprise  several  speakers  and  texts 
addressees in the form of the various characters. Secondly, these 
characters can move between the roles of addresser and addressee 
as often as they like, as indicated in the diagram by the arrows 
pointing in both directions. This leads on to the final major pecu- 
liarity of dramatic communication, which is that dialogue is the 
most important medium for the transmission of information. We 
should note, however, that a number of lyric texts also incorporate 
dialogues, and that various forms of  monological Speech occur 
frequently in dramas. 

-1 

addressec 
historical 
author 

I) 

- 1  

extratextual level of communication 

dramatic text: 

intratextual level of communication 

character as 

addresser  4) 

character as 
addressee 

addressee: 
real reader 
or audience 

I 

I 

Figure 4.7.: A communication model for dramatic texts 

A Communication Model for  Dramallc Tcxl\:  Spvcliil Ftanluri.\  ol Tlirniri. Coiiiiiiuiil(nlliiii  7') 

