Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Pahl-Wostl, C., J. Sendzimir, P. Jeffrey, J. Aerts, G. Berkamp, and K. Cross. 2007. Managing change
toward adaptive water management through social learning. Ecology and Society 12(2): 30. [online] URL:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

Research, part of a Special Feature on New Methods for Adaptive Water Management
Managing Change toward Adaptive Water Management through Social
Learning

Claudia Pahl-Wostl 1, Jan Sendzimir 2, Paul Jeffrey 3, Jeroen Aerts 4, Ger Berkamp 5, and 
Katharine Cross 5

ABSTRACT. The management of water resources is currently undergoing a paradigm shift toward a more
integrated and participatory management style. This paper highlights the need to fully take into account
the complexity of the systems to be managed and to give more attention to uncertainties. Achieving this
requires adaptive management approaches that can more generally be defined as systematic strategies for
improving management policies and practices by learning from the outcomes of previous management
actions.  This  paper  describes  how  the  principles  of  adaptive  water  management  might  improve  the
conceptual and methodological base for sustainable and integrated water management in an uncertain and
complex world. Critical debate is structured around four questions: (1) What types of uncertainty need to
be taken into account in water management? (2) How does adaptive management account for uncertainty?
(3) What are the characteristics of adaptive management regimes? (4) What is the role of social learning
in managing change? Major transformation processes are needed because, in many cases, the structural
requirements, e.g., adaptive institutions and a flexible technical infrastructure, for adaptive management
are  not  available.  In  conclusion,  we  itemize  a  number  of  research  needs  and  summarize  practical
recommendations based on the current state of knowledge.

Key Words: adaptive management; integrated water resources management; social learning; adaptive
governance; change management; uncertainty

INTRODUCTION

In the past, water resources management focused
on  well-defined  problems  that  grew  increasingly
urgent during the 19th and 20th centuries as urban
populations  became  more  concentrated  and
industrial and agricultural productivity intensified.
Public  health  problems  within  cities  and  the
seemingly insatiable demand for more water drove
major  efforts 
in  urban  water  management.
Eutrophication problems in lakes and coastal seas
triggered  more  involved  research  and  legislation.
Rivers were controlled to protect cities and dryland
agriculture  from  flooding.  In  the  short  run,
technological  fixes  proved  to  be  very  efficient  in
solving  a  number  of  these  urgent  environmental
problems,  e.g.,  the  increasing  sophistication  of
wastewater  treatment  plants  addressing  problems
related  to  hygiene  and  pollution.  However,  these
problems were generally dealt with in isolation, and

potentially  undesirable  long-term  consequences
were  not  taken  into  consideration.  The  system
paradigm on which traditional water management
has been based has often been characterized as a
“command-and-control” approach. System design
was  typically  targeted  at  high  predictability  and
controllability.

For the past two decades, new and more integrated
approaches  to  water  management  have  been
developed  and  are  being  implemented  to  address
perceived  shortcomings  in  earlier  approaches.
During the last decade, the principle of integrated
water  resources  management  (IWRM)  has,  for
example,  been  used  as  a  framework  for  the
implementation  of  such  integrated  approaches  to
water management (GWP-TEC 2000). “Integrated”
clearly indicates a desire to functionally engage a
range  of  perspectives  by  formally  considering  a
wide range of potential trade-offs at different scales

1University of Osnabrueck, 2International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 3Cranfield University, 4Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 5IUCN - The World
Conservation Union

in  space  and  time.  Such  an  approach  attempts  to
overcome  the  shortcomings  of  technical  end-of-
pipe solutions that deal with individual problems in
isolation  and  run  the  risk  of  causing  unexpected
consequences  (Pahl-Wostl  2007a).  However,  the
implementation  of  an  IWRM  approach  that  fully
accounts for the complexity and interdependencies
of human-technology-environment (HTE) systems
has yet to be realized. The increasing awareness of
the complexity of environmental problems and of
HTE systems has encouraged the development of
new management approaches based on the insight
that the systems to be managed are, in broad terms,
complex,  unpredictable,  and  characterized  by
unexpected responses to intervention (Committee
on Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research 1999,
Pahl-Wostl 2002, Prato 2003, Pahl-Wostl 2007b; S.
Light and K. Blann, unpublished manuscript). Such
complex  adaptive  systems  are  characterized  as
hierarchies  of  components  interacting  within  and
across scales, with emergent properties that cannot
be  predicted  by  knowing  the  components  alone
(Lansing 2003). Control is distributed rather than
central  (Allen  and  McGlade  1985,  Pahl-Wostl
1995). Rather than trying to change the structure of
complex,  adaptive  systems 
them
controllable  by  external  intervention,  innovative
management approaches aim to make use of the self-
organizing properties of the systems to be managed.

to  make 

Increasing awareness of complexity is a necessary
but  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  changing  water
management practices. Recent attempts (e.g., Pahl-
Wostl 2002, Galaz 2005, Jeffrey and Gearey 2006,
W.  Medema,  B.  McIntosh,  and  P.  Jeffrey,
unpublished manuscript) to manage water systems
have  revealed  that  major  knowledge  gaps  in  the
following  areas  may 
the  successful
implementation of new management approaches.

impede 

The management paradigm

Current  approaches  to  realizing  integrated  water
management build on the heritage of a command-
and-control paradigm that has been dominating the
water management community for decades. Such a
paradigm requires that system behavior be highly
predictable.  The  failure  to  implement  integrated
approaches  may  due  less  to  the  principle  of
integration  itself  than  to  the  mental  models  that
frame the process of its implementation.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 30
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art30/

The conceptual foundation

An  understanding  of  the  concepts  involved  in
system  change,  especially  when  this  occurs  in
surprising and nonlinear ways, is needed to make
researchers ask questions and think about ways to
manage change. Basic concepts of this type capture
insights into what blocks or foments change over
what  area  and  for  how  long,  all  of  which  is  key
information  for  management  decisions.  Concepts
such  as  resilience,  vulnerability,  and  adaptive
capacity can inspire new management approaches
and  help  us  to  better  understand  and  express  the
results of exploratory analyses of and experiments
involving  complex  adaptive  systems.  These
concepts  can  also  help  us  understand  how
management  influences  system  change.  Concepts
of  this  type  can  help  to  characterize  water
management regimes, by accounting for both their
components  and  their  interdependencies,  and  to
analyze their performance under current and future
drivers  in  terms  of,  e.g.,  reaching  management
objectives and the ability of the management regime
to  adapt  to  change.  This  conceptual  foundation
would be greatly improved by better integrating the
complexity and unpredictability of policy and social
learning  processes.  The  implementation  of  water
management  policies  in  a  given  river  basin  must
take into account its political, economic, and social
realities and thus requires a transparent and open
discourse between scientists and policy makers

Transition processes

Current water management regimes have evolved
over  decades,  and  changing  them  will  take  some
time.  How  can  we  directly  study  and  analyze
transition  processes  when  the  scale  of  change
approaches or exceeds the time horizon of academic
projects or careers? A better understanding of the
transition processes and the barriers and facilitators
for change is essential to catalyze change and foster
the implementation of a transition process toward
integrated  and  adaptive  resource  and  water
management 
failures,
despite  superior  technology  and  well-financed
central control, give rise to a key question: How can
we improve understanding and trust through a social
process of learning and negotiated change?

regimes.  Management 

We maintain that, in environmental, economic, and
social terms, sustainable water management can be
successfully implemented only if more attention is

