84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 75

© 2008 Journal of Peace Research,
vol. 45, no. 1, 2008, pp. 75–89
Sage Publications (Los Angeles, London, New Delhi
and Singapore)
DOI 10.1177/0022343307084924

http://jpr.sagepub.com

Peace and Development: Towards 
a New Synthesis*

JON BARNETT
School of Anthropology, Geography and Environmental Studies, 
University of Melbourne

This article develops a theory of peace as freedom that explains some important relationships between
peace  and  development.  It  does  this  by  critically  examining  and  then  synthesizing  Johan  Galtung’s
theory  of  peace  as  the  absence  of  violence  and  Amartya  Sen’s  theory  of  development  as  freedom.
Galtung’s theory of peace is clear on the meaning and causes of direct violence, but vague on the details
of structural violence. Sen’s theory helps overcome many of the problems associated with structural vio-
lence, although its focus on agents and the state tends to downplay the importance of larger-scale politi-
cal and economic processes. In the theory of peace as freedom, peace is defined as, and in praxis is
enlarged  through,  the  equitable  distribution  of  economic  opportunities,  political  freedoms,  social
opportunities, transparency guarantees, protective security and freedom from direct violence. The insti-
tutions required for peace as freedom are considered, and it is suggested that the pluralist state is the
best model for providing and maintaining peace as freedom. Some implications of this theory for exist-
ing and future analyses of the causes of violent conflict are discussed.

Introduction

This  article  is  concerned  with  the  intersec-
tion  of  peace  and  development  theories.
Efforts  to  formally  relate  the  two  concepts
date  back  to  the  rise  of  both  the  idea  of
‘development’ and growth in concern about
nuclear war after World War II.1 Academic
thinking about the intersections of peace and
development  arguably  reached  its  zenith  in
the  1980s  (Galtung,  1989;  Hettne,  1983;
Sørensen, 1985). At the same time, the inter-
national policy community was investigating
similar  issues,  for  example  through  the

* Thanks to three anonymous reviewers and JPR editor Nils
Petter Gleditsch for their extremely helpful suggestions on
ways to improve this article, which was completed with the
assistance  of  an  Australian  Research  Council  Discovery
Grant DP0556977. E-mail: jbarn@unimelb.edu.au.
1 Although thinking about social order (peace) and social
progress  (development)  is  arguably  as  old  as  human
thought itself.

Brandt  (ICIDI,  1983)  and  Palme  (ICDSI,
1982)  reports,  which  investigated  the  eco-
nomic  and  social  opportunity  costs  of  the
military–industrial  complex  and  the  rela-
tionships  between  economic  growth  and
military spending.

These  early  explorations  of  peace  and
development  sought  to  answer  the  question
‘what  kind  of  development  would  facilitate
the  emergence  of  more  peaceful  economic,
social and political structures?’ (Hettne, 1983:
340). To answer this question, Hettne (1983)
and Sørensen (1985) drew from the ‘Another
Development’  view  proposed  by  the  Dag
Hammarskjöld  Foundation  (1975),  which
defined  development  as  need-oriented,  en-
dogenous, self-reliant, ecologically sound and
based  on  structural  transformation. Yet  this,
like  Galtung’s 
‘six  cosmologies’
approach  to  peace  and  development,  is

(1985) 

75

84924_JPR_75-90.qxd  12/14/2007  2:44 PM  Page 76

76

journal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

volume 45 / number 1 / january 2008

somewhat abstract and offers little in the way
of  steps  towards  transformation. This  article
seeks  to  offer  a  somewhat  more  evidence-
based and policy-oriented answer to Hettne’s
question.

So, there is a history of efforts to link peace
and development. However, since the end of
the Cold War, the concept of ‘peace’ has been
notably absent in the development literature.
In  peace  research,  there  has  been  a  marked
absence  of  any  new  theory  of  peace  beyond
ongoing debates about the democratic peace,
and there has been no theory and almost no
reference to a wider idea of peace that includes
development  issues.  But,  at  the  same  time,
both peace and development researchers have
focused  on  the  causes  and  consequences  of
civil wars. Many of the possible causes identi-
fied  by  peace  research,  such  as  resource
endowments  (de  Soysa,  2000),  poverty
(Fearon & Laitin, 2003), democracy (Hegre 
et  al.,  2001),  rent-seeking  (Weede,  1996),
financial  f lows  (Gartzke  &  Li,  2003),  and
economic and political transitions (Esty et al.,
1999),  are  central  concerns  of  development
studies. Surprisingly, the impacts of civil wars
on  development  are  not  as  central  to  de-
velopment studies as they ought to be (but see
Collier,  2003;  Stewart  &  Fitzgerald,  2001),
although  there  has  been  much  research  into
the causes of and solutions to complex politi-
cal emergencies that involve both violent con-
f lict  and  humanitarian  crises  (Goodhand,
1999).  This  has,  in  turn,  led  to  a  growing
interest  in  the  broader  connections  between
development  and  security  (Duffield,  2001;
Thomas, 2001).

These post-Cold War studies suggest that
there is a conf luence of problems in the world
that  justifies  some  new  thinking  about  the
connections between peace and development
in theory. Weede (1996: 4) also identifies this
conf luence, writing that ‘the problems of eco-
nomic  development  and  prosperity,  social
order and liberty, and international relations
and war are … closely interdependent’. This

conf luence  seems  to  be  more  prevalent  in
developing countries, suggesting a prima facie
case  for  linking  development  with  peace.
Further, as the international community in-
creasingly engages in various interventions to
restore peace and provide humanitarian relief
and reconstruction in conf lict-prone develop-
ing  countries,  the  success  of  these  interven-
tions  to  some  extent  ‘depends  on  how  the
problems  of  “conf lict”  and  “crisis”  and  the
desired goal of “peace” are conceived at a more
general level’ (Nathan, 2000: 188). This latter
argument  suggests  that  there  may  be  some
practical  advantages  to  rethinking  peace  in
terms of the structural conditions – such as are
associated with the development agenda – that
enable it.

This  article  therefore  seeks  to  articulate
some  important  relationships  between  peace
and  development  in  theory.  It  does  this  by
linking  Galtung’s  (1969)  theory  of  ‘peace  as
the  absence  of  violence’  with  Sen’s  (1999)
theory of ‘development as freedom’. A focus
on  these  two  theorists  is  justified,  because
both are recognized as leaders in their respec-
tive fields of peace studies and development
economics – as recognized by their peers,2 and
by the major international awards they have
received.3 Through  this  process,  the  article
constructs a theory of ‘peace as freedom’ that
accommodates  concern  for  both  peace  and
development.

The  theory  of  peace  as  freedom  that  is
developed here is a wider notion of peace that
includes more than the absence of direct phys-
ical violence. However, it does not advocate an
open-ended approach such as that associated
with Galtung’s (1969) classic formulation of
‘structural violence’, which has been criticized

2 According to the ISI Web of Science database, Galtung’s
(1969) Journal of Peace Research article has been cited 160
times in listed journals, while Sen’s (1999) Development as
Freedom has  been  cited  698  times  (checked  on  20
December 2006).
3 Galtung was awarded the Right Livelihood Award (the
‘Alternative  Nobel  Prize’)  in  1987;  Sen  was  awarded  the
Nobel Prize in economics in 1998.

