Session 4 
25.04.2016

Historic, cultural and legal aspects of induction methods for ASCs

Silja Timm

sitimm@uos.de

1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Historical Background
A variety of different drugs are part of our society since decades and is often used for the induction of 
altered states of consciousness. These drugs differ in their chemical composition and in the effects they 
evoke in the user, according to which most of them can be assigned to one of four big classes. The first class 
comprises psychedelics, which are characterized by altering the state of consciousness of the user and by 
producing for example different kinds of hallucinations and pseudo-hallucinations. Examples are LSD, 
psilocybin and mescaline. The second class consists of opioids like heroin, opium or morphine, which 
provide a pain relief and lead to euphoria and sedation.  As a third class there are the so-called stimulants, 
like cocaine and speed, which act on the central nervous system and produce feelings of extreme well-being
and increased motor and mental activity. Lastly, the fourth class contains depressants, which slow down the
nervous system and suppress brain activity, thereby causing a relief from anxiety. Exemplary substances are 
alcohol and cannabis. In the 19th century many of the aforementioned substances were first isolated and 
identified.  Mescaline and LSD, for example, were first synthesized in 1919 by E. Späth and 1938 by A. 
Hoffmann, respectively. The psychoactive effects of LSD were not discovered until five years later.  In 
addition to these effects, potential medical usage of LSD was first studied in 1952 by C. Savage, using LSD in 
people with depression. One year later R. Sandison clinically employed LSD in psycholytic therapy (Fig. 1). 
However, also potential dangers, like psychological and physical harms, resulting from the usage of some 
drugs were discovered the latest, when the substances appeared on the streets. This in turn led to drug 
usage and its harm becoming a topic of public interest. In order to reduce the drug usage, the first drug 
conventions were introduced in the US in 1970. According to the US government, their purpose to classify 
drugs based mainly on their medical use and potential harm. Until now drugs are classified into five distinct 
categories in the US, namely Schedules I to V. Schedule I classifies substances with currently no accepted 
medical use and a high potential for abuse. Schedule I substances are assumed to be the most dangerous of
all scheduled drugs, with the potential of severe psychological or physical dependence. Those include 
among others heroin, LSD, psilocybin. The difference between these and the Schedule II drugs is merely the 
fact that the latter have some accepted medical use. Examples are cocaine, methamphetamine or Ritalin. 
Schedule III drugs, like ketamine and anabolics, have only a moderate to low risk of physical and 
psychological dependence and a lower potential for abuse. Drugs classified in Schedule IV and V have a low 
or very low potential for abuse as well as risk of dependence, like Valium and Lomotil (Drug Schedules n.d.).

Current Debate
For many years there is an ongoing debate about the current drug laws. Not only is the process of drug 
scheduling criticized for not being based on scientific evidence but it is also argued that the scheduling itself
may produce harm and has huge impacts on for example society or neuroscience research (Nutt et al., 
2013). Not only are, according to Nutt et al (2007), the potential harms, like risk of addiction or physical 

2

