Leading Edge

Review

Engineering Cellular Metabolism

Jens Nielsen1,2,3,* and Jay D. Keasling2,4,5,6,7,*
1Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Kemiva¨ gen 10, SE412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
2Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kogle Alle´ , DK2970-Hørsholm, Denmark
3Science for Life Laboratory, Royal Institute of Technology, SE17121-Solna, Sweden
4Joint Bioenergy Institute, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA
5Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering & Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley,
CA 94720, USA
6Biological Systems & Engineering Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
7Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center (Synberc), Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
*Correspondence: nielsenj@chalmers.se (J.N.), keasling@berkeley.edu (J.D.K.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.02.004

Metabolic engineering is the science of rewiring the metabolism of cells to enhance production of
native metabolites or to endow cells with the ability to produce new products. The potential appli-
cations of such efforts are wide ranging, including the generation of fuels, chemicals, foods, feeds,
and pharmaceuticals. However, making cells into efﬁcient factories is challenging because cells
have evolved robust metabolic networks with hard-wired, tightly regulated lines of communication
between molecular pathways that resist efforts to divert resources. Here, we will review the current
status and challenges of metabolic engineering and will discuss how new technologies can enable
metabolic engineering to be scaled up to the industrial level, either by cutting off the lines of control
for endogenous metabolism or by inﬁltrating the system with disruptive, heterologous pathways
that overcome cellular regulation.

Introduction
For at least 8,000 years, humans have harnessed microbes to
produce fermented foods and beverages. In more recent his-
tory, microbes have been used to produce chemicals for a
wide range of applications. During World War I, Chaim Weis-
mann developed the acetone-butanol-ethanol fermentation pro-
cess, which was used for 50 years to produce acetone and is
now being revived for production of 1-butanol. In the 1920s,
fermentation of the ﬁlamentous fungus Aspergillus niger was
adapted to generate citric acid, a food and beverage ingredient.
During World War II, the same technology was used for indus-
trial scale production of penicillin, the ﬁrst pharmaceutical pro-
duced by fermentation.

The following decades witnessed a dramatic increase in the
use of microorganisms to synthesize natural products of pharma-
ceutical interest, such as antibiotics, cholesterol lowering agents,
immunosuppressants, and anti-cancer drugs. Improved perfor-
mance of classical fermentation processes for such purposes
was typically achieved through mutagenesis and screening.
For antibiotics in particular, this was an extremely efﬁcient
approach, with penicillin production using Penicillium chrysoge-
num boosted by more than 10,000-fold (Thykaer and Nielsen,
2003). Although genetic engineering made it possible to use a
more directed approach to improve metabolism, most work
focused on the development of cell factories for production of re-
combinant proteins for use as pharmaceuticals, and today, there
are more than 300 biopharmaceutical proteins and antibodies on
the market with sales exceeding $100 billion (Langer, 2012).

With the late 1980s and early 1990s came new insights into the
complex inner workings of cellular metabolism, fueled by bioin-

formatics and mathematical modeling methods that allowed
quantitative analysis. This enabled speciﬁc genetic modiﬁca-
tions altering cellular metabolism to be introduced, such that
ﬂuxes could be directed toward the product of interest. Thus,
the ﬁeld of metabolic engineering was born (Bailey, 1991; Ste-
phanopoulos and Vallino, 1991; Nielsen, 2001; Keasling, 2010).
Now, more than twenty years later, metabolic engineering has
been exploited not only to improve traditional microbial fermen-
tation processes, but also to produce chemicals that are
currently used as fuels, materials, and pharmaceutical ingredi-
ents (Table 1).

Despite the advanced systems and synthetic biology technol-
ogies now available for detailed phenotypic characterization of
cells and genome editing, developing new cell factories that
meet the economic requirements for industrial scale production
is still challenging, typically requiring 6–8 years and over $50
million. The reason for this is inherent to the cells themselves.
To ensure metabolic homeostasis even when exposed to vary-
ing environmental conditions, cells have evolved extensive
regulation and complex interactions between metabolic path-
ways. Redirecting carbon ﬂuxes toward desired metabolites
therefore requires modulating the lines of communication in
endogenous metabolic pathways or inﬁltrating the system with
disruptive signals that interfere with these regulatory mecha-
nisms. At present, our knowledge of how metabolism is regu-
lated even in simple model cells is limited. As a result, engineer-
ing a cell
factory involves several rounds of the so-called
‘‘design-build-test’’ cycle, in which a certain metabolic design
is implemented and improved through genetic engineering
and thereafter tested.

Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1185

Table 1. Some Success Stories of Metabolic Engineering

Chemical

Lysine

1,3-Propanediol

7-ADCA

1,4-Butanediol

Application

Cell Factory

Companies

feed additive (>1 million tons/year)

Corynebacterium glutamicum

Evonik, ADM, CJ, Ajinomoto

chemical building block, e.g., for production
of materials, cosmetics, and food ingredients

precursor for the broad-spectrum antibiotic
Cephalexin

chemical building block, e.g., for production
of Spandex

Escherichia coli

Dupont and Tate&Lyle
joint venture

Penicillium chrysogenum

DSM

Escherichia coli

Genomatica

Artemisinic acid

anti-malarial drug

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Sanoﬁ Aventis (process
developed by Amyris)

Isobutanol

advanced biofuel

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Gevo, Butamax

Here, we will discuss the principles and current challenges of
metabolic engineering, focusing on how metabolism can be en-
gineered for industrial
level production of speciﬁc chemicals,
either through de-regulation of endogenous metabolism or
through insertion of heterologous pathways that overcome
cellular regulation. We will then discuss how technologies devel-
oped in recent years can contribute to the design-build-test cy-
cle and how adding a fourth element to this cycle, namely
‘‘learn,’’ can improve the process. Based on implementation of
speciﬁc metabolic designs, can we gain new knowledge about
how metabolism operates and how it is regulated and subse-
quently use this knowledge for improved design?

Challenges for Metabolic Engineering
Even though metabolic engineering has found applications in
optimization of existing processes, much of the current focus
is on the development of novel bioprocesses. In the fuel and
chemical industry, there is much interest in exploiting the poten-
tial of bio-based production for two major reasons: the sustain-
ability factor and the possibility of producing new molecules.
Bio-based production of chemicals allows for use of renewable
raw materials, such as plant-derived feedstocks like starch, su-
crose, cellulose, and lignocellulose that are more sustainable
than many traditional chemical processes relying on fossil fuels.
Furthermore, replacement of traditional chemical synthesis with
bio-based production typically results in reduced environmental
footprint in terms of energy usage and emission (Saling, 2005).
The key driver for the chemical industry is, however, the produc-
tion of chemicals that have either better properties than tradi-
tional chemicals or chemicals that can ﬁnd new applications.
The Route for Development of a Novel Bioprocess
Production of a so-called ‘‘drop-in’’ chemical starts with identiﬁ-
cation of the molecule of interest, followed by determination of
whether there exists a metabolic pathway in nature to produce
this molecule (Figure 1A). Drop-in chemicals are molecules pro-
duced by fermentation instead of from fossil feedstock or other
natural sources that are difﬁcult to work with (such as rare
plants). In some cases, it is possible to identify a natural producer
of the molecule, and this cell factory can then be used for further
improvement. If, on the other hand, you want to transfer the
biosynthetic pathway to a heterologous host, and if all of the en-
zymes of the biosynthetic pathway have not yet been identiﬁed,
heterologous expression requires enzyme discovery as part of

1186 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

the metabolic engineering program, as illustrated for production
of artemisinic acid (Ro et al., 2006; Westfall et al., 2012; Paddon
et al., 2013) and opioids (Galanie et al., 2015). In some cases,
however, it is difﬁcult to identify all the biosynthetic enzymes
needed to produce a molecule, and this hinders pathway recon-
struction in a heterologous host. For instance, not all the en-
zymes involved in biosynthesis of the anti-cancer drug taxol
have yet been identiﬁed (Ajikumar et al., 2010). Improved tech-
nologies for DNA and RNA sequencing, bioinformatics, and
structure-function predictions have advanced our ability to
rapidly identify enzyme candidates for a speciﬁc biosynthetic
pathway that can subsequently be evaluated for their ability to
reconstruct a complete pathway. In case it is not possible to
identify a natural producer, chimeric pathways may have to be
reconstructed and some of the enzymes may have to be evolved
or engineered to have new features.

Traditionally, natural producers were developed for produc-
tion of the molecule of interest through classical strain improve-
ment. However, with the advent of metabolic engineering, the
preferred route for developing a novel bio-process is now
through the use of ‘‘platform cell factories’’ (Figure 1A). Examples
include Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Escherichia coli, Aspergillus
niger, Bacillus subtilis, Corynebacterium glutamicum, and Chi-
nese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. The advantage of using platform
cell factories are numerous: (1) they are very well characterized in
terms of genetics and physiology; (2) it is easier to obtain product
approval by governmental organizations if they have been used
for production of a range of products already; (3) many tools for
genome editing are available; and (4) many gene expression
tools are available, e.g., plasmids, promoters, and terminators.
Each of the above mentioned cell factories have speciﬁc advan-
tages. For example, A. niger and B. subtilis have very efﬁcient
protein secretion and are therefore widely used for production
of industrial enzymes, while CHO cells are well suited for pro-
duction of glycosylated proteins to be used as pharmaceuticals.
For fuels and chemicals, there is an increasing focus on use
of S. cerevisiae and E. coli as platform cell factories, with
C. glutamicum as an attractive third choice. To produce a mole-
cule of interest, the biosynthetic pathway for the molecule is
reconstructed in the platform cell factory, resulting in establish-
ment of a proof-of-principle strain (Figure 1B). Generally, this
strain can be patented and represents a key milestone in the
development of a novel bioprocess.

