chapter three

Who Engages in Proxy War?

This book holds that proxy wars are constitutive of a relation-
ship between a benefactor, who is a state or non- state actor 
external  to  the  dynamic  of  an  existing  conﬂ ict,  and  their 
chosen proxies who are the conduit for weapons, training and 
funding from the benefactor. Therefore, the question of who 
engages in proxy wars involves a detailed look at the mecha-
nisms  of  indirect  assistance  that  are  built  between  two  or 
more states, between states and non- state actors, and between 
groups of non- state actors. Arguably, there are four identiﬁ -
able types of relations between these actors that have shaped 
the dynamics of proxy wars in the past and present. These are 
when:

•  a state uses another state (as a surrogate force);
•  a state uses a non- state actor (such as a terrorist organiza-

tion, militia group or private military company);

•  a non- state actor uses a state;
•  a non- state actor uses another non- state actor (as a surro-

gate force).

  This  chapter  is  dedicated  to  deconstructing  these  rela-
tionships  and  exploring  how  recent  examples  of  indirect 
interventions  reveal  a  broad  spectrum  of  proxy  war- wagers. 
It will begin by exploring how states, particularly superpow-
ers,  have  come  to  adopt  proxy  war  strategies  as  a  mainstay 
of  their  interest  and  ideological  projection  capabilities.  But 
before that discussion begins, it is worth explaining why some 

45

46 

Who Engages in Proxy War?

actors in the international system should not be classiﬁ ed as 
proxy  war- wagers.  Two  groups  in  particular  come  to  mind: 
non- governmental  organizations  (NGOs)  and  international 
organizations (IOs). Both of these actors arguably do not con-
form  to  standards  constitutive  of  who  ﬁ ghts  in  a  proxy  war 
because their aims and objectives do not fall within the wider 
boundaries  of  what  constitutes  a  proxy  war.  NGOs,  mainly 
humanitarian aid organizations, and IOs, namely the United 
Nations and its ad hoc peacekeeping missions, are fundamen-
tally dedicated to the alleviation of suffering within war- torn 
communities and to bringing about swift and peaceful resolu-
tions to ongoing violence. Their goals are not to bring about 
the victory of one side over another. Simply, their presence in 
a war zone does not meet the threshold of what a proxy inter-
vention inherently is: the benefactor must want to further a 
war  aim.  Humanitarian  aid  delivery  does  not  constitute  the 
furtherance  of  a  war  aim;  neither  do  multilateral  efforts  to 
keep warring factions apart. As such, it is not appropriate to 
classify NGOs or IOs as actors who ﬁ ght proxy wars. This has 
mainly been the preserve of states and violent non- state actors 
(VNSAs).

The State and Proxy Wars

The very concept of proxy war itself, although historically ubiq-
uitous, became indelibly associated with the machinations of 
Cold War superpower politics in the mid- twentieth century. 
It was during this period that proxy wars became a frequently 
used  vehicle  by  strong  states  for  achieving  strategic  goals 
within,  and  beyond,  their  self- styled  ‘spheres  of  inﬂ uence’. 
The statist foundation of proxy wars was manifest by the way 
in which well- deﬁ ned ideological principles came to encapsu-
late the raison d’état of the two superpowers of the Cold War 
era,  and  thus  help  shape  the  dynamics  of  the  wider  world 

