Psychon Bull Rev (2012) 19:647–653
DOI 10.3758/s13423-012-0245-7

BRIEF REPORT

Does media multitasking always hurt? A positive correlation
between multitasking and multisensory integration

Kelvin F. H. Lui & Alan C.-N. Wong

Published online: 12 April 2012
# Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2012

Abstract Heavy media multitaskers have been found to per-
form poorly in certain cognitive tasks involving task switch-
ing, selective attention, and working memory. An account for
this is that with a breadth-biased style of cognitive control,
multitaskers tend to pay attention to various information
available in the environment, without sufficient focus on the
information most relevant to the task at hand. This cognitive
style, however, may not cause a general deficit in all kinds of
tasks. We tested the hypothesis that heavy media multitaskers
would perform better in a multisensory integration task than
would others, due to their extensive experience in integrating
information from different modalities. Sixty-three participants
filled out a questionnaire about their media usage and com-
pleted a visual search task with and without synchronous
tones (pip-and-pop paradigm). It was found that a higher
degree of media multitasking was correlated with better mul-
tisensory integration. The fact that heavy media multitaskers
are not deficient in all kinds of cognitive tasks suggests that
media multitasking does not always hurt.

Keywords Attention . Media multitasking

Introduction

Humans often engage in multitasking—that is, performing
more than one task simultaneously or in rapid alternation.
We can effortlessly talk to each other while walking and watch
television while eating. Certain multitasking situations are
K. F. H. Lui (*) : A. C.-N. Wong
Department of Psychology,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
362A Sino Building,
Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
e-mail: f2a8kelvin@yahoo.com.hk

more challenging because the tasks involved are more difficult
or they concurrently engage overlapping processes and, thus,
interfere with each other more. Talking on cell phones while
driving is a good example (e.g., Nunes & Recarte, 2002;
Strayer & Johnston, 2001). Sometimes, such difficulties can
have serious consequences.

One way that modern technology has transformed human
living styles is through the invention and popularization of
various media of communication and interaction, including
radio, television, telephone and text messaging, video games,
computers, and the Internet. Media multitasking has thus
grown into a popular phenomenon and even a way of life,
especially among young people (Roberts, Foehr, & Rideout,
2005). The high accessibility of computers, in particular, has
cultivated obsessive multitasking, due to the ease of switching
between instant messaging, music, Web surfing, e-mail,
online videos, computer-based games, computer-based appli-
cations, and so forth (Foehr, 2006).

The immediate effects of media multitasking on one’s
memory, learning, and other cognitive functions have been a
focus of recent research. It was found that watching TV while
doing homework decreased participants’ performance on the
recognition of TV content (Zhang, Jeong, & Fishbein,
2010). Besides, Furnham and Bradley (1997) found detrimen-
tal effects of background music on participants’ performance in
various cognitive tasks. Armstrong and Chung (2000) showed
a negative effect of background television during science article
reading on subsequent recall and recognition. Similarly, reading
and watching video simultaneously impaired participants’ per-
formance on the reading task (Lin, Robertson, & Lee, 2009).
Moreover, Hembrooke and Gay (2003) found that opening
laptops and engaging in media multitasking behaviors during
a lecture impaired students’ memory for lecture contents.

Research also has examined the chronic effects of media
multitasking. Kirschner and Karpinski (2010) found that heavy

648

Psychon Bull Rev (2012) 19:647–653

Facebook users reported having lower grade point averages
(GPAs) and suggested the possible deleterious effect of simul-
taneously using Facebook with other activities. Besides, the
amount of time spent on instant messaging was found to be
negatively correlated both with cognitive performance in lab
tasks and with GPA (Fox, Rosen, & Crawford, 2009). While
these two studies assumed that Facebook usage and instant
messaging often co-occur with other activities and, thus, rep-
resent multimedia usage, they did not, however, exclude the
simpler possibility that Facebook usage and instant messaging
simply occupy the time that could be used for studying.

A recent large-scale study (Ophir, Nass, & Wagner, 2009)
compared the way in which heavy media multitaskers process
information differently from those who do not. Participants
completed a self-report questionnaire in their study to indicate
their level of media multitasking. It was found that heavy
media multitaskers performed worse than light media multi-
taskers in several cognitive tasks that involved working mem-
ory, selective attention to task-relevant information in visual
search, and surprisingly, task switching. It was suggested that
heavy media multitaskers have developed the habit of simul-
taneously consuming information from multiple media and,
thus, “breadth-biased cognitive control.” As a result, heavy
media multitaskers could not precisely differentiate between
important information and distractors. They readily spread
their attention to different sources of information regardless
of whether they were relevant to the primary task at hand. This
is why they were inferior to light media multitaskers in tasks
that required one to disregard irrelevant information in the
environment and in memory.

An intriguing possibility, however, is that their breadth-
biased cognitive control will lead to better performance if a
task contains some unexpected information that is important
to the task at hand. When a media multitasker reads, for
example, he or she may more readily detect an SMS ringtone
from a mobile phone, although the ringtone does not carry
information useful for the primary task of reading. In fact,
situations like that may actually be more representative of
what happens in real life (Lin, 2009).

In this study, our aim was to measure the potential dif-
ference between high and low media multitaskers in this
tendency to capture information from seemingly irrelevant
sources. Specifically, we accessed how much one can inte-
grate visual and auditory information automatically, using a
visual search task in the pip-and-pop paradigm (Van der
Burg, Olivers, Bronkhorst, & Theeuwes, 2008). In this
paradigm, participants made speeded responses to indicate
which of a horizontal or vertical line segment was present
among a number of oblique line segments of various orienta-
tions. Both target and distractor lines in the display changed
color between red and green continuously. Participants per-
formed the same search task on both tone-absent (baseline)
and tone-present trials, but only in tone-present trials was each

target color change accompanied by a short auditory tone
(the pip). Although the tone did not contain any information
about the target color, location, or orientation, its synchrony
did make the target pop out from the cluttered display, leading
to better performance in the tone-present than in the tone-
absent condition. Interestingly, as was shown in Van der Burg
et al., this pip-and-pop effect is largely bottom-up and auto-
matic, occurring even when the pip is rather uninformative
(i.e., synchronous with the target only 20% of the time). These
features render the pip-and-pop effect a good tool for investi-
gating the association between media multitasking experience
and one’s tendency to automatically attend to and integrate
seemingly task-irrelevant, unexpected sources of information.

Method

Participants

Sixty-three participants (34 females), from 19 to 28 years of
age, participated in the experiment, with monetary compensa-
tion. All had normal hearing and normal or corrected vision.

Apparatus

A media multitasking questionnaire identical to the one in
Ophir et al. (2009) was introduced to all participants. Part
one asks about the number of hours one spends each week in
using 11 primary media, including print media, television,
computer-based video, music, nonmusic audio, video or com-
puter games, telephone and mobile phone voice calls, instant
messaging, text messaging, e-mail, Web surfing, and other
computer-based applications. Part two requires the participant
to fill in a media multitasking matrix with the number 0, 1, 2, or
3 to indicate how often one uses each of the other media at the
same time with a primary medium. A formula was used to
calculate, for each participant, a media multitasking index that
indicated the mean number of media the participant was
engaged in concurrently. For details of the media multitasking
index formula, please refer to Ophir et al.

A personal computer with E-Prime version 1.2 and a head-
phone were used to run the visual search task. The program
was modified from the one used in Van der Burg et al.’s (2008)
Experiment 1, with a few changes made to the set size and
number of trials.

Procedure

All participants first filled out the media use questionnaire and
then completed the search task. They were seated approxi-
mately 80 cm away from the screen and wore headphones
during the search task. Each trial began with a fixation dot
presented at the center of the screen that lasted for 1,000 ms,

