CHAPTER  12

Power and racism

P. J. Henry
Felicia Pratto

This chapter examines the relationship between the social psychological 

conceptualizations of power and of racism, and outlines how research 
on racism can benefit from incorporating the understanding of power pro-
cesses at the intergroup level. Until recently, the social psychology litera-
tures on power and racism developed largely independently (for an excep-
tion  see  Operario  &  Fiske,  1998).  Before  presenting  our  analysis  of  the 
relationship between racism and power, we provide theoretical definitions 
of these constructs. Social psychologists have rarely explicitly defined rac-
ism (for an exception, see Jones, 1997), despite their considerable attention 
to prejudice, discrimination, and stereotyping of racial and ethnic groups. 
Rather, they either rely on colloquial meanings or have defined particular 
varieties of racism (e.g., symbolic racism, modern racism, aversive racism, 
institutionalized  racism).  Hence,  we  begin  by  defining  racism.  Then  we 
summarize how power is defined and used in social psychological research, 
and find that current practices are not adequate for encompassing our defi-
nition of racism. The remainder of the chapter reexamines extant theories 
of racial prejudice and beliefs through the lens of power. We argue that by 
incorporating a broader definition of power, research on racism can more 
fully understand the effects of intergroup power on phenomena recognized 
as racist.

 

341 

342 

Power iN iNTergroUP relaTioNS

definiTion and concePTualizaTion iSSueS 

Surrounding Power and raciSm

“Race” and Racism
Races are not natural categories that classify people by their inherent fea-
tures. Races are social constructions that people create as they try to lend 
meaning to, account for, and justify social differences, such as differential 
role distribution, differential performance at tasks deemed socially mean-
ingful, and most especially, group differences in political ascendancy. His-
torians of race hold that people largely create race concepts as social con-
trol  mechanisms  to  justify  the  colonization,  subordination,  enslavement, 
exclusion, segregation, exploitation, or other oppressive treatment of others 
to benefit themselves (e.g., Allen, 1994, 1997; Fredrickson, 1981; Gossett, 
1963/1997).  Among  the  groups  that  have  been  referred  to  as  a  separate 
“race”  by  someone  else  are  Africans,  Asians,  and  their  descendants  by 
U.S. Americans; Irish and Scots by English invaders; Anasahs by Aryans in 
the Indus Valley; descendants of Noah’s son Ham in the Talmud; Jews by 
European Christian leaders after the Crusades; numerous Native peoples 
by  Spanish,  French,  and  English  conquistadores;  Celts  and  Germans  by 
some  European  and  American  scholars;  and  Aryans  and  Semites  by  the 
Nazis (Allen, 1994; Gossett, 1963/1997).

Once race definitions correspond to social realities, such as identities, 
income levels, language use patterns, religious and cultural practices, race 
designations  can  help  to  distinguish  these  realities,  without  reinforcing 
racial inequality. The U.S. Census divides the population into five different 
race groups: Indigenous American (North and South), White (European), 
African, Asian, Pacific Islander, plus mixed-race people, which is useful for 
documenting  race  differences  in  household  composition  and  income,  for 
example. Race is considered in medicine (Paradies, 2006), because certain 
health problems are more characteristic of some races than of others. For 
example, people whose ancestors hail from Northern Europe or the U.S./
Mexico  border  area  are  more  likely  to  get  diabetes  (Moalem  &  Prince, 
2007), whereas Africans and African Americans have higher rates of sickle-
cell anemia (e.g., Mankad & Hoff, 1992). Religious practices, family pat-
terns, aesthetics of music and speech, and many other habits of living are 
passed on intergenerationally and contribute to perceptions of race differ-
ences. Because “race” persists as a social category system, it may be one of 
the few socially remembered markers we have that correspond to a history 
of shared environmental influences and cultural patterns.

However,  when  perceived  racial  differences  are  evaluated,  such  that 
they justify differential treatment to produce race-based hierarchy, we have 
the contemporary lay definition of racism, given by these current diction-
ary entries:

