J Autism Dev Disord
DOI 10.1007/s10803-014-2097-7

O R I G I N A L P A P E R

Impact of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy on Observed Autism
Symptom Severity During School Recess: A Preliminary
Randomized, Controlled Trial

Jeffrey J. Wood • Cori Fujii • Patricia Renno •
Marilyn Van Dyke

Ó Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract This
study compared cognitive behavioral
therapy (CBT) and treatment-as-usual (TAU) in terms of
effects on observed social communication-related autism
symptom severity during unstructured play time at school
for children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Thir-
teen children with ASD (7–11 years old) were randomly
assigned to 32 sessions of CBT or community-based psy-
chosocial treatment (TAU) for 16 weeks. The CBT pro-
gram is based on the memory retrieval competition model
and emphasizes the development of perspective-taking
through guided behavioral experimentation supplemented
with reﬂective Socratic discussion and supported by parent
training and school consultation to promote generalization
of social communication and emotion regulation skills.
Trained observers blind to treatment condition observed
each child during recess on two separate days at baseline
and again at posttreatment, using a structured behavioral
observation system that generates frequency scores for
observed social communication-related autism symptoms.
CBT outperformed TAU at posttreatment on the frequency
of self-isolation, the proportion of time spent with peers,
the frequency of positive or appropriate interaction with
peers, and the frequency of positive or appropriate peer
responses to the target child (d effect size range 1.34–1.62).
On average, children in CBT were engaged in positive or
appropriate social
interaction with peers in 68.6 % of
observed intervals at posttreatment, compared to 25 % of

J. J. Wood (&)  C. Fujii  P. Renno  M. Van Dyke
Department of Education, University of California, Los Angeles,
Moore Hall, Box 951521, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
e-mail: jwood@gseis.ucla.edu

J. J. Wood
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA

intervals for children in TAU. Further investigation of this
intervention modality with larger samples and follow-up
assessments is warranted.
Keywords Cognitive behavioral therapy  Autism
spectrum disorders  School-aged children  School
observations

Introduction

Affecting core autism symptoms through psychosocial
treatment has been an elusive goal in the autism literature,
particularly for school-age children. Most psychosocial
interventions that have been tested in randomized, con-
trolled trials have failed to yield measureable improvement
in core autism symptoms among school-aged children (Rao
et al. 2008), although recent interventions are beginning to
show more promise (e.g., Kasari et al. 2012). The severity
of autism spectrum symptoms exhibited during childhood
predicts the level of adaptive functioning in later years
(e.g., Szatmari et al. 2009), and therefore has important
prognostic and treatment implications. Developing treat-
ments that can signiﬁcantly reduce core autism symptom
severity in children is thus a high priority (Spence and
Thurm 2010).

Core autism symptoms are wide-ranging and multifac-
eted, spanning from impaired reciprocal communication
and pragmatic language deﬁcits, to limited friendships, to
repetitive behaviors such as insistence on nonfunctional
routines. The core symptoms tend to be stable over time
(Matson and Horovitz 2010; Matson et al. 2010) and
resistant even to some intensive interventions (e.g., Daw-
son et al. 2010). The majority of individuals diagnosed
with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) in childhood, even

123

those with high intelligence, have substantial morbidity in
adulthood, such as limited employment and social net-
works (Eaves and Ho 2008; Marriage et al. 2009). How-
ever,
individuals on the autism spectrum who have
categorically lower levels of ASD symptoms have better
overall prognoses than those with categorically higher
levels of core autism symptoms. For example, Szatmari
et al. (2009) found that although all children with ASD
demonstrated mixed to poor outcomes, those with Asper-
ger’s disorder as opposed to autistic disorder had relatively
better outcomes in adult social relationships and daily
living skills. In fact, across the three domains of adaptive
functioning in a standardized assessment scale adminis-
tered during young adulthood,
the group difference
between Asperger’s disorder and autistic disorder was 20
standard points, even after controlling for IQ. It is likely
that
interventions for children with ASD will need to
substantially reduce the severity of core autism symptoms
to improve children’s prognosis and later functioning. A
fundamental goal in the ﬁeld of autism research is the
discovery of methods that substantially mitigate the pri-
mary symptoms of ASD (e.g., Reichow and Wolery 2009;
Spence and Thurm 2010).

While behavioral and talk-based therapies are widely
used in community settings for school-aged youth with
ASD (Hess et al. 2008), the evidence base for many such
treatments is sparse. With the exception of atypical anti-
psychotic medication, no medical or psychosocial treat-
ments for children with ASD meet American Psychological
Association Division 12 (e.g., Chambless and Hollon 1998)
guidelines for possible efﬁcacy, and even antipsychotic
medication has not yielded improvement
in the social
communication domain per se. School-aged children with
high-functioning ASD have evidenced poor
treatment
response, in terms of generalization and maintenance, to
many extant psychosocial interventions. Many treatments
for the elementary school-age-group involve group-based
social skills training, but external validity and durability of
effects have been poor and efﬁcacy has not been estab-
lished (e.g., Ferraioli and Harris 2011; Rao et al. 2008).
Nonetheless,
some promising ﬁndings have recently
emerged. A social skills group treatment for the 8–12 years
old age-group-based on CBT and social learning principles
involving parents as social coaches in community settings
to address generalization problems found an effect of
treatment (vs. waitlist) on parent-reported core autism
symptoms (DeRosier et al. 2011). Without independent
ratings of outcome, however,
the efﬁcacy of this and
similar programs remains to be further evaluated.

Second, a promising peer-mediated intervention for
school-age children with ASD has also recently been
evaluated in a randomized controlled trial, with evidence of
greater improvement in observed social engagement with

123

J Autism Dev Disord

peers on the playground in comparison to a traditional
social skill intervention and waiting list conditions (Kasari
et al. 2012). Given the use of both independent ratings of
outcome as well as the use of an active control group, peer-
mediated intervention appears promising. However, many
other studies have reported a failure of generalization
effects outside of the therapy room for psychosocial and
medical interventions for core autism symptoms (McDou-
gle et al. 2005; West et al. 2009).

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) offers one approach
that is potentially well-suited to addressing core autism
symptoms in higher functioning school-age youth. CBT is
among the most successful treatment modalities for many
childhood psychiatric disorders, achieving large, clinically
signiﬁcant outcomes in pediatric OCD, anxiety, and dis-
ruptive behavior disorders, even in studies with active or
placebo control groups. CBT has already been effectively
adapted to treat collateral behavioral and emotional prob-
lems in school-aged children with ASD (Chalfant et al.
2007; Fujii et al. 2013; Reaven et al. 2012; Sofronoff et al.
2007; Storch et al. 2013; Wood et al. 2009a, b). Children
with high-functioning ASD are verbal and have average to
above average intellectual abilities (e.g., Loveland and
Tunali-Kotoski 2005). Lickel et al. (2012) investigated
whether children with high-functioning ASD would have
prerequisite skills that might impact receptivity to CBT
(e.g., ability to discriminate between thoughts, feelings,
and behavior) and generally found no differences in com-
parison to typically developing children except in the area
of emotion discrimination, suggesting no inherent barrier to
children’s comprehension of CBT concepts.

A number of CBT-based interventions for core autism
symptoms in youth await comprehensive empirical evalu-
ation (see, e.g., Wood et al. 2011). In a randomized, con-
trolled trial of personalized CBT for elementary-aged
youth with ASD, 19 children with ASD and concurrent
anxiety (ages 7–11 years) were randomized to CBT
delivered one-on-one by a therapist, or to a waitlist (Wood
et al. 2009b). The modular CBT program consisted of 16
weekly, 90 min sessions emphasizing emotion awareness
and regulation, development of theory-of-mind skills, and
control of repetitive behaviors. The treatment approach
involved an application of cognitive behavioral principles
of memory retrieval competition (Brewin 2006) to CBT
techniques such as Socratic discussions, rehearsal, and
in vivo exposure, which were employed to address each
child’s unique constellation of autism symptoms and
emotional and behavioral difﬁculties. There was a statis-
tically signiﬁcant difference between the CBT group and
the waitlist group at posttreatment/postwaitlist on total
parent-reported autism symptoms (d = .77), with gains
maintained at 3-month follow-up. These ﬁndings were then
replicated by an independent research group in a sample of

