Consciousness and Cognition 25 (2014) 27–41

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Consciousness and Cognition

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / c o n c o g

The free will inventory: Measuring beliefs about agency
and responsibility
Thomas Nadelhoffer a,⇑

, Jason Shepard b, Eddy Nahmias c, Chandra Sripada d, Lisa Thomson Ross e

a Department of Philosophy, College of Charleston, 66 George Street, Charleston, SC 29424, United States
b Department of Psychology, Emory University, 36 Eagle Row, Atlanta, GA 30322, United States
c Department of Philosophy, Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University, P.O. Box 3994, Atlanta, GA 30302-3994, United States
d Department of Philosophy, The University of Michigan, 2215 Angell Hall, 435 South State Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States
e Department of Psychology, College of Charleston, 66 George Street, Charleston, SC 29424, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

In this paper, we present the results of the construction and validation of a new psycho-
metric tool for measuring beliefs about free will and related concepts: The Free Will Inven-
tory (FWI). In its ﬁnal form, FWI is a 29-item instrument with two parts. Part 1 consists of
three 5-item subscales designed to measure strength of belief in free will, determinism,
and dualism. Part 2 consists of a series of fourteen statements designed to further explore
the complex network of people’s associated beliefs and attitudes about free will, determin-
ism, choice, the soul, predictability, responsibility, and punishment. Having presented the
construction and validation of FWI, we discuss several ways that it could be used in future
research, highlight some as yet unanswered questions that are ripe for interdisciplinary
investigation, and encourage researchers to join us in our efforts to answer these questions.
Ó 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Article history:
Received 30 October 2013

Keywords:
Free will
Determinism
Dualism
Soul
Responsibility
Punishment
Psychometrics
Scale
Folk intuitions

1. Introduction

Philosophers have long debated the nature of free will and moral responsibility. Psychologists have more recently joined
the fray. While some researchers have tried to shed empirical light on the debate concerning whether we have free will, typ-
ically concluding that we do not (e.g., Bargh, 2008; Harris, 2012; Libet, 1999; Wegner, 2002), others have focused instead on
exploring our beliefs about free will and the role they play in our daily lives (e.g., Alquist, Ainsworth, & Baumeister, 2013;
Bergner & Ramon, 2013; Haynes, Rojas, & Viney, 2003; Nettler, 1959; Nettler, 1961; Ogletree & Oberle, 2008; Pronin & Kug-
ler, 2010; Schooler, Nadelhoffer, Nahmias, & Vohs, in press; Stillman & Baumeister, 2010; Stillman et al., 2010; Stroessner &
Green, 1990; Viney, Parker-Martin, & Dotten, 1988; Viney, Waldman, & Barchilon, 1982; Waldman, Viney, Bell, Bennett, &
Hess, 1983). Each of these two projects is interesting and important in its own right. For present purposes, we focus on
the psychology of believing in free will—a topic that has received increasing attention in the wake of gathering evidence that
challenging people’s beliefs about free will may inﬂuence their behavior in surprising and sometimes alarming ways. For
example, telling people they do not have free will has been shown to increase cheating (Vohs & Schooler, 2008) decrease
helping behavior and increases aggression (Baumeister, Masicampo, & DeWall, 2009), reduce self-control (Rigoni, Kuhn,

⇑ Corresponding author. Fax: +1 843 953 6388.

E-mail addresses: nadelhofferta@cofc.edu (T. Nadelhoffer), jason.s.shepard@emory.edu (J. Shepard), enahmias@gsu.edu (E. Nahmias), sripida@umich.edu

(C. Sripada), rossl@cofc.edu (L.T. Ross).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2014.01.006
1053-8100/Ó 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

28

T. Nadelhoffer et al. / Consciousness and Cognition 25 (2014) 27–41

Gaudino, Sartori, & Brass, 2012), and impair detection of errors (Rigoni, Wilquin, Brass, & Burle, 2013). These ﬁndings suggest
that believing in free will may be instrumentally valuable from the standpoints of positive psychology and public morality.
This is true regardless of whether or not we actually have free will, a related but orthogonal issue that we will not be explor-
ing here.

These recent ﬁndings also highlight the importance of having valid and reliable tools for measuring beliefs about free will
and related concepts. For while the gathering data suggest that diminishing people’s belief in free will may lead to increased
cheating, decreased helping, lower punishment judgments, and the like, the validity of these ﬁndings depends in part on the
validity and reliability of the scales used to measure people’s beliefs about free will, determinism, and responsibility. As such,
these otherwise exciting ﬁndings have highlighted a problem that has hindered empirical research on free will beliefs from
the outset—namely, that while researchers have developed several scales during the past thirty years for measuring beliefs
about free will (e.g., Paulhus & Carey, 2011; Paulhus & Margesson, 1994; Rakos, Laurene, Skala, & Slane, 2008; Stroessner &
Green, 1990; Viney, McIntyre, & Viney, 1984; Viney et al., 1982), each of these tools is problematic. The main goal of our
project was to develop a new psychometric instrument that would have greater validity than previous scales while at the
same time yielding more ﬁne-grained data concerning how people think about the complex relationships among free will,
responsibility, dualism, choice, determinism, and related concepts.

In this paper, we ﬁrst discuss the extant tools that have been developed for measuring free will beliefs, and we identify
some of their limitations. Then, we present the results of the construction and validation of a new psychometric tool for
measuring beliefs about free will: The Free Will Inventory (FWI). The FWI is a 29-item instrument with two parts (which
can be given together or separately). Part 1 consists of three ﬁve-item subscales designed to measure strength of belief in
free will, determinism, and dualism. Part 2 consists of a series of 14 statements designed to further explore people’s asso-
ciated beliefs and attitudes about free will, (in)determinism, choice, the soul, predictability, responsibility, and punish-
ment. After presenting the construction and validation of FWI, we (a) discuss several ways that it could be used in
future research, (b) highlight some as yet unanswered questions that are ripe for interdisciplinary investigation, and
(c) encourage researchers to join us in our efforts to answer these questions.

1.1. Measuring beliefs about free will: An overview

Most of the earliest work on the psychology of believing in free will focused on the relationship between beliefs about free
will, determinism, and punishment (e.g., Nettler, 1959; Nettler, 1961; Stroessner & Green, 1990; Viney et al., 1982; Viney
et al., 1988). Though groundbreaking, the results were often mixed and hard to interpret. For instance, in one of the ﬁrst
studies on free will beliefs, Nettler (1959) claimed to have found that believing in free will is correlated with cruelty, retri-
bution, and revenge and that believing in determinism is correlated with people being less punitive and treating others with
more dignity. In response, Viney et al. (1982) ﬁrst reported data that seemed to support the opposite conclusion—namely,
that people who believe in free will are less rather than more punitive—before later ﬁnding ‘‘neither reliable correlations
between punitiveness and beliefs in free will or determinism nor reliable correlations between rationales for punishment
and beliefs in free will or determinism’’ (Viney et al., 1988, p. 20).

Looking back on the early empirical work on free will beliefs with the beneﬁt of hindsight, there are at least two les-
sons to learn. First, what researchers ﬁnd when it comes to beliefs about free will can depend a great deal on how the
researchers conceptualize and think about free will. Not only can researchers’ own free will beliefs inﬂuence how they
design their experiments, phrase their questions, etc., but these beliefs may also color how the ﬁndings are analyzed
and interpreted. Let us call this the problem of theory contamination—i.e., when researchers’ own theoretical commitments
unduly inﬂuence or bias their ﬁndings. While it may be impossible to keep one’s theoretical commitments entirely at bay
while designing studies and analyzing data, it is important for researchers to make a concerted effort to avoid theory con-
tamination as much as possible. One strategy that we adopted was making sure we had both psychologists and philos-
ophers on our team, as well as people with competing views about free will and its relationship to determinism.

A second lesson to be learned from the early research on free will beliefs is that researchers should have a shared vocab-
ulary (or lexicon) when exploring these types of complex beliefs and attitudes. Instead, much of the early empirical work in
this area contains conﬂicting deﬁnitions of key terms (or usages of key terms) such as determinism, libertarian free will,
choice, dualism, fatalism, and the like. Moreover, not only are key terms used in ways that differ from one researcher to
the next, these terms are often deﬁned in ways that most philosophers who specialize in the free will debate would reject.
This generates worries about both content and criterion validity. While philosophical experts on free will should not have
carte blanche to deﬁne contested terminology however they see ﬁt, the long and deep engagement of philosophers with
the question of free will should be taken into consideration during empirical investigations of free will beliefs.

At least some of these methodological worries might be alleviated if psychologists and philosophers worked together
rather than laboring individually on their own respective sides of the disciplinary divide. For while psychologists do not ap-
pear to have a shared lexicon when it comes to free will and related concepts, philosophers have developed a common
vocabulary for talking about these issues. Take, for instance, the concept of determinism. While the term has a variety of
meanings and uses (both in everyday life and amongst psychologists), philosophers typically have one thing in mind when
they discuss determinism—namely, the thesis that given the actual past and the laws of nature, there is only one possible
future at any moment in time (e.g., van Inwagen, 1983).

