3
1
0
2

 

v
o
N
5

 

 
 
]

Y
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
1
2
1

.

1
1
3
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Big Data Approach to Computational Creativity
Lav R. Varshney, Florian Pinel, Kush R. Varshney, Debarun Bhattacharjya, Angela Sch¨orgendorfer, and

Yi-Min Chee

1

Abstract

Computational creativity is an emerging branch of artiﬁcial intelligence that places computers in the center of
the creative process. Broadly, creativity involves a generative step to produce many ideas and a selective step to
determine the ones that are the best. Many previous attempts at computational creativity, however, have not been
able to achieve a valid selective step. This work shows how bringing data sources from the creative domain and
from hedonic psychophysics together with big data analytics techniques can overcome this shortcoming to yield a
system that can produce novel and high-quality creative artifacts. Our data-driven approach is demonstrated through
a computational creativity system for culinary recipes and menus we developed and deployed, which can operate
either autonomously or semi-autonomously with human interaction. We also comment on the volume, velocity,
variety, and veracity of data in computational creativity.

I. INTRODUCTION

C REATIVITY is said to be the generation of a product or service that is judged to be novel and also to be

appropriate, useful, or valuable by a knowledgeable social group [2], and is oft-said to be the pinnacle of
intelligence. Due to greater competitiveness in global markets for all industries, there is need to make product/service
development cycles more efﬁcient. Indeed creativity is the basis for “disruptive innovation and continuous re-
invention” [3]. Given limits on human creativity resources, it is important to develop technologies for greater
creativity, either operating autonomously or in collaboration with people.

Can a computer be creative? Computational creativity is concerned with machine systems that produce novel and
high-quality artifacts (broadly construed) for the pleasure and consumption of people. Such systems could produce
jokes, poems, visual art, architectural blueprints, business processes, fashion ensembles, ﬁnancial service designs,
or any other such artifact that is popularly viewed by people as creative output. In this paper, we focus primarily
on culinary recipes, which include both the set and quantities of ingredients to be used as well as the methods and
procedures of preparation. We also discuss menus, which are sequences of culinary recipes.

We focus on a speciﬁc domain because at least with human creativity, there is substantial evidence that this
cognitive ability is domain-speciﬁc [4], in the sense a good engineer may not be a good poet. Notwithstanding,
psychometric testing has indicated some correlations of ability that allows domains to be grouped into categories:
expressive creativity (visual arts, writing, humor); performance creativity (dance, drama, music); and scientiﬁc
creativity (invention, science, culinary), with architecture not related to any of these [5]. Most past attempts at
computational creativity have focused on either expressive or performance creativity [6]–[8], whereas we consider
a form of scientiﬁc creativity (but see [9], [10]).

Our computational creativity system operates in stages that are modeled after stages in human creativity [2]:
ﬁnd problem, acquire knowledge, gather related information, incubate, generate ideas, combine ideas, select best
ideas, and externalize ideas. As may be apparent, many of these stages require the processing of external big data
sets, as well as large volumes of intermediate data generated by the system itself. The staged approach not only
leads to modular system design, but also improves computer-human interaction when operating semi-autonomously.
Developing big data algorithms and systems is important, but interaction and presenting results to users in ways that
allow them to trust insights is also important [11]. In semi-autonomous mode our system takes a mixed-initiative
approach where the human and computer have a creation conversation in which each contributes ideas [12], rather
than the computer acting as a nanny, coach, or pen-pal for the human creator [13].

This work is based in part on a paper presented at the IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics and Cognitive Computing,
New York, July 2013 [1], an abstract presented at the Workshop on Information in Networks, New York, October 2013, and an abstract that
has been submitted to the ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Toronto, April 2014.
The authors are with the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY (e-mail: {lrvarshn, pinel, krvarshn, debarunb,
aschoer, ymchee}@us.ibm.com).

2

For culinary creativity, we draw on a variety of data sets: large repositories of existing recipes as inspiration,
chemoinformatics data to understand food at the molecular level, and hedonic ﬂavor psychophysics data to predict
which compounds, ingredients, and dishes people will like and dislike. Since these data sets arise from noisy sensors
like gas chromatography and from noisy data preprocessing steps such as natural language processing, there may
be issues of veracity that algorithms must be robust to, cf. [14].

These data sets are used to develop generative algorithms that intelligently produce thousands or millions of new
ideas from the recipe design space which, for particular dishes and regional cuisine inﬂuences, has a size in excess
of 1024. The large volume of generated ideas must then be evaluated to select the best ones. Evaluative metrics are
based on principled models of human perception structured according to ideas from neurogastronomy and derived
from recipe, chemical, and psychophysical data. The information-theoretic functional Bayesian surprise is used to
measure attraction of human attention and novelty. Since the system is meant to support real-time interaction with
human creators and thereby make the product design cycle faster, the system must operate with the velocity of
thought.

Building on individual recipe design, complete menus can also be created using ideas from topic modeling.
By using the principle of variety across dishes in a menu, measured using a stochastic distance function, input
parameters for dish design may be generated and selected.

Many previous attempts at computational creativity had not been able to achieve a valid selective step [2], as we
do here. A central contribution of this work is in showing how bringing data sources from the creative domain and
from hedonic psychophysics together with big data analytics techniques can overcome this shortcoming to yield a
system that produces novel and high-quality creative artifacts.

It is worth noting that selection based on supervised learning trained on complete artifacts is not appropriate
for creativity, as it is for search, since the entire premise is to create novel artifacts each time rather than to ﬁnd
existing ones. Basic models of human perception, applied at the constituent part level, and techniques for building
up predictions of quality and novelty for whole artifacts is critical to our approach.

The remainder of the paper discusses details of data sets, data engineering, system architecture, data analytics
algorithms, and results. Although we use culinary recipes as the example domain herein, the basic concepts are
generally applicable to big data approaches to computational creativity in any domain.

II. CREATIVITY?

Creativity seems to be a property of cognitive systems, but how should it be deﬁned and assessed? One aspect
of cognition is understanding where in a museum a new painting hangs—reasoning about the world as it is, but
another aspect is understanding whether that painting exhibits creativity—reasoning about things that had never
previously been imagined. Deductive and inductive reasoning about the world are easily assessed since there is
often ground truth, but not so with creativity.

One deﬁnitional approach is to list several properties of a creative output, such as being novel, being useful,
rejecting previously held ideas, and providing clarity [15]. But this deﬁnition does not provide an operational
method of assessment. Viewing creativity as a relationship between the creator/creation and an observer [7], if a
human evaluator deems something creative, we say it is creative [16]. Therefore, by deﬁnition, creativity is only
meaningful in the presence of an audience perceiving the creation. To formalize, we adopt a deﬁnition of creativity
used in human creativity research.

Deﬁnition 1 ( [2]): Creativity is the generation of a product that is judged to be novel and also to be appropriate,

useful, or valuable by a suitably knowledgeable social group.

In this deﬁnition, there are two dimensions: novelty and quality. Although there is an individual component to
creativity, the adopted standard is a social one. An artifact that is novel to the creator need not be novel to the
social group; what the creator ﬁnds of high-quality may not be seen as such by the social group. Thus creativity is
fundamentally socially constructed. A computational creativity system has no meaning in a closed universe devoid
of people.

The most common way to assess creativity of an artifact under this deﬁnition is the Consensual Assessment
Technique (CAT) [17], where the creativity of an artifact is rated by two or more experts in the ﬁeld. The measured
creativity is the average rating of the judges. Although it may seem this methodology is too subjective, many studies
have demonstrated that ratings of experts are generally highly correlated, yielding good interrater reliability [18].
In contrast, novice ratings are not highly correlated and so novices should not be used for the CAT [19].

