Universität Osnabrück 

 
 

Strategy and Competitive Analysis 

 
 

Prof Dr Aidan O’Connor 

 

Course Outline 

 

2014 

 
 

Course Objective 
 
This  course  introduces  students  to  the  concepts  of  strategy  and  in  particular  to  those  of 
competitive analysis and of the various firm levels of strategy. 
 
It  focuses on the tools of analysis, on contemporary theory  and on the  application of theory 
through case studies and an analysis of a firm. 
 
Course Design and Schedule 
 
The course shall consist of classes and tutorials.  There is continuous assessment with a group 
project, as well as, a final examination.  As the course is delivered during ten days it is 
imperative that students should be available during these days. 
 
 
Evaluation and Final Grade for Examination and Project 
 
The weighting for the Examination is 60% and for the group project 40%. 
 
Course Outline 
 
Chapter 1 
Chapter 2  
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 
Chapter 5 
Chapter 6  
Chapter 7  
Chapter 9  
Chapter 10  Corporate Diversification Strategy 
Chapter 12  Corporate Single Industry Strategy 
 
Course Text 
 
Strategic Management, Hill and Jones, Houghton Mifflin, 9th Edition 
Economics of Strategy, Besanko, Dranove, Shanley and Schaefer, Wiley 
 

Leadership, Strategy and Competitive Advantage 
Opportunities and Threats - Analysing the External Environment 
Competencies and Profitability - Analysing Internal Resources 
Strategy at the Functional-Level 
Strategy at the Business-Level 
Industry Environment and Business-Level Strategy 
Technology 
Strategy at the Corporate Level 

Further Reading 
 
 
B. Bowonder, Anirudha Dambal, Shambhu Kumar, and Abhay Shirodkar, 2010, Innovation 
Strategies for Creating Competitive Advantage, Research - Technology Management, 
Industrial Research Institute 
 
Danneels E., 2004, Disruptive Technology Reconsidered: A Critique and Research Agenda, 
Journal of Product Management Innovation, Product Development & Management 
Association, Volume 21, 246–258 

 

McKinsey Global Survey, 2007, How Companies Approach Innovation 

 

McKinsey Quarterly, 2000, Gaining Advantage over Competitors 

 
McKinsey Quarterly, 2010, How to Put your Money Where your 
Strategy Is 

 

McKinsey Global Survey, 2010 Innovation and Commercialization 

 

Nelson, R., 1991, Why do Firms Differ and Does it Matter, Strategic Management Journal, 
Volume 12, 61 – 74 

 

Porter, M., 2008, The Five Competitive Forces that Shape Strategy, Harvard Business Review 

 

Rumelt, R., 2003, What in the World is Competitive Advantage? The Anderson School at 
UCLA, Policy Working Paper 2003-105 
 
Group Project 
 
 
Project Aims 
 
Students are required to write a research paper on a firm using the concepts of strategy. 
 
Project Rubrics 
 
All students are organised into project groups.  A group is comprised of several students.  You 
must focus on the theme of the project and incorporate the principles of strategy. 
 
Tutorials 
 
There are tutorials to evaluate progress and to assist students in researching and writing the 
group project.  All students must attend their group’s tutorial.  You must also present your 
project. 
 

