Recently Gates has, with K. Anthony
Appiah, co-edited the encyclopedia Encarta
Africana. As well as continuing his work of
recovery and retrieval of marginalized
African American texts, he has become in-
creasingly interested in investigating and
reporting on the lives of contemporary
African Americans. He is the co-author,
with Cornel West, of The Future of the
Race (1996), which reﬂects on the relation-
ship between the black elite and the larger
black community, and has written and pro-
duced a number of documentaries that ex-
plore African Americans’ history and their
present. The publications that accompany
these series include America Beyond the Color
Line (2004). In the last few years, he has
increasingly taken on the role of public
intellectual, not only broadcasting on PBS
but also publishing articles in such main-
stream publications as the New Yorker and
New York Times.

SEE ALSO: Appiah, Kwame Anthony;
Baker, Houston A., Jr.; Poststructuralism;
Saussure, Ferdinand de; West, Cornel

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS

Crafts, H. (2002). The Bondswoman’s Narrative.

New York: Warner.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (1987). Figures in Black: Words,
Signs, and the “Racial” Self. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (ed.) (1988a). The Schomburg Library
of Nineteenth-Century Black Women Writers, 30
vols. New York: Oxford University Press.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (1988b). The Signifying Monkey:
A Theory of African-American Literary Criticism.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (ed.) (1990). Reading Black, Reading
Feminist: A Critical Anthology. New York:
Meridian.

Gates, H. L., Jr. (2004). America Beyond the Color
Line: Dialogues with African Americans. New
York: Warner.

G E N D E R T H E O R Y 617

Gates, H. L., & Appiah, K. A. (eds.) (1986). “Race,”
Writing, and Difference. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Gates, H. L., Jr., & Appiah, K. A. (eds.) (1993–4)
Critical Perspectives Past and Present (Amistad
Literary Series), 9 vols. New York: Amistad Press.
Gates, H. L., Jr., & Appiah, K. A. (eds.) (1999) Encarta

Africana. Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press.

Gates, H. L., Jr., & McKay, N. Y. (eds.) (1997). The
Norton Anthology of African American Literature.
New York: Norton.

Gates, H. L., Jr., & West, C. (1996). The Future of the

Race. New York: Knopf.

Joyce, A. J. (1987). The black canon: Reconstructing
black American literary criticism. New Literary
History, 18(2), 335–344.

Wilson, H. E. (1983). Our Nig: or, Sketches from the

Life of a Free Black. New York: Vintage.

Gender Theory
KAYE MITCHELL

GENDER

Historically, the term “gender” has been
used primarily as a grammatical term, re-
ferring to the classiﬁcation of nouns (in
languages including Latin, French, and
German) as masculine, feminine, or neuter.
It is derived from the Old French term for
“genre” which, in turn, derives from the
Latin genus, meaning “birth,” “family,” or
“nation,” but also referring back to older
and broader meanings such as “kind” or
“type.” The other use of “gender,” to refer to
the (human) state of being male or female,
also dates back to the fourteenth century,
but it’s not until the twentieth century that
the latter usage becomes common. In the
late twentieth century, thanks largely to the
inﬂuence of feminism, “gender” tends to be
distinguished from “sex,” with the former
seen as referring to the culturally attributed
characteristics associated with being a
woman or a man, and the latter viewed as
a matter of nature or biology, although, as

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

618 G E N D E R T H E O R Y

I’ll go on to discuss, the sex/gender distinc-
tion continues to be a source of debate
and contention both within and beyond
feminism.

Despite considerable evidence of argu-
ment and speculation on the allegedly dif-
fering characteristics of the sexes through
history, the active theorizing of gender as a
concept and category really begins in the
nineteenth century, thanks to the competing
inﬂuences of psychoanalysis and sexology,
so it’s to those discourses that I’ll turn ﬁrst,
before highlighting just a few of the contri-
butions to gender theory made by feminism,
masculinity studies, queer theory, and trans-
gender studies, respectively.

SEXOLOGY AND
PSYCHOANALYSIS

The pseudo-scientiﬁc investigations of sex-
ual behavior in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, which acquired the dis-
ciplinary name of “sexology,” have much to
say about questions of gender and are
instructive in the way that they reveal the
complex imbrication of (biological) sex,
gender, and sexuality, the difﬁculty of talk-
ing about one without invoking the others.
Sexual desire, increasingly, is viewed either
as one of the contributing factors to gender
identity, or as a product or expression of
one’s gender; either way, the relationship is
ﬁgured as causal and unorthodox sexual
practices or desires tend, in sexology, to
be associated with (or blamed on) forms
of gender dysmorphia. This is evident, for
example,
in Richard von Krafft-Ebing’s
characterization of female homosexuality
as “the masculine soul, heaving in the female
bosom,” and his assertion that “uranism
may nearly always be suspected in females
wearing their hair short, or who dress in the
fashion of men” (Bland & Doan 1998:
46–7). Writers and clinicians
such as

Krafft-Ebing, Iwan Bloch, Otto Weininger,
and Havelock Ellis, then, sought to taxono-
mize and analyze human sexual behavior,
but in doing so often helped contribute to a
developing discourse of gender difference.
Although Havelock Ellis is more liberal
than Krafft-Ebing in his treatment of female
homosexuality, suggesting that sexual in-
version need not be accompanied by
“aesthetic inversion,” the assertion of a pri-
mary difference between the genders is to
the fore in his popular 1894 publication,
Man and Woman. Here, Ellis describes
women as characterized by “a certain docil-
ity and receptiveness,” possessed of an
“emotional nature” and a tendency to
“suggestibility,” “less able than men to stand
alone” and to think and act independently;
such characteristics are, in Ellis’s assessment
of them, rooted in the physiological differ-
ences between men and women (Bland &
Doan 1998: 22). Despite being quite a rad-
ical thinker in his pronouncements on sex-
ual freedom and supposed sexual deviance
(of which he was remarkably tolerant), Ellis
reinforces a myth of women as inherently
contradictory – “the affectability of women
exposes them . . . to very diabolical mani-
festations. It is also the source of very much
of what is most angelic in women” – and of
men as signiﬁcantly more active, and as
driven primarily by libidinal
impulses –
“in men the sexual instinct is a restless
source of energy which overﬂows into all
sorts of channels” (Bland & Doan 1998: 23).
The outcome of such characterizations is
a vision of maleness and femaleness as op-
posed and complementary, interdependent
in their deﬁnitions. As Weininger asserts, in
Sex and Character (1903): “The ideas ‘man’
and ‘woman’ cannot be investigated sepa-
rately; their signiﬁcance can be found out
only be placing them side by side and con-
trasting them” (Bland & Doan 1998: 27).
However, while much of this sexological
work might appear to be quite conservative

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

