UNSW Law Journal 

Volume 35(1) 

ENLIGHTENED SHAREHOLDER VALUE 

IN UK COMPANY LAW 

RICHARD WILLIAMS* 

360 

 

 
 

 

I   INTRODUCTION: ENLIGHTENED SHAREHOLDER VALUE 

AND SECTION 172 OF COMPANIES ACT 2006 

The  economic  difficulties  that  have  beset  Western  economies  since  the 
financial  crisis  of  2008–09  have  prompted  policy-makers  in  many  countries  to 
place  an  increasing  emphasis  on  the  need  to  foster  a  long  term  perspective  in 
business  decisions.1  This  narrative  has  sparked  renewed  interest  in  the 
‘enlightened shareholder value’ provisions in section 172 of the United Kingdom 
(‘UK’) Companies Act 2006 (UK) (‘Companies Act’), which requires directors to 
have  regard  to  a  range  of  interests  in  discharging  their  duty  to  promote  the 
success of their company.2 

Section  172  of  the  Companies  Act  enshrines  the  principle  of  enlightened 
shareholder value (‘ESV’) into UK company law by appending to the directors’ 
duty to ‘promote the success of the company for the benefit of its members as a 
whole’  a  list  of  matters  to  which  directors  are  required  to  ‘have  regard’  in 
discharging the duty. The ESV principles in section 172 are stated with a high 
degree of generality and, as such, read very much like a list of exhortations to 
‘good’  conduct  by  directors  rather  than  specific  instructions  to  undertake,  or 
refrain from undertaking, any particular actions. Nonetheless, section 171(1)(a)–
                                                 
*  

1  

2  

Lecturer in Law, Homerton College, University of Cambridge. I am grateful for the comments of the 
UNSW Law Journal’s anonymous referees in compiling this paper. Responsibility for any errors in the 
paper remains, however, entirely my own.  
In the UK, for example, the current Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition have promoted, 
respectively ‘moral capitalism’ and ‘responsible capitalism’. See, eg, ‘Cameron's “Moral Capitalism” 
Vision’, The Guardian (online), 19 January 2012 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/feedarticle/10048672>; 
‘Ed Miliband's Speech on Responsible Capitalism’, UK Labour Party, 19 January 2012 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/ed-miliband-on-responsible-capitalism,2012-01-19>. 
See, eg, Jingchen Zhao, ‘Promoting More Socially Responsible Corporations through UK Company Law 
after the 2008 Financial Crisis: The Turning of the Crisis Compass’ (2011) 22 International Company 
and Commercial Law Review 275, 283; Virginia Harper Ho, ‘“Enlightened Shareholder Value”: 
Corporate Governance Beyond the Shareholder-Stakeholder Divide’ (2010) 36 Journal of Corporation 
Law 61. See also Andrew Keay, ‘Risk, Shareholder Pressure and Short-Termism in Financial Institutions: 
Does Enlightened Shareholder Value Offer a Panacea?’ (2011) 5 Law and Financial Markets Review 435, 
though Keay argues that enlightened shareholder value is unlikely to prove useful in combating short-
termism by boards of financial companies.  

Forum: Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law 

2012 
 
(f)  of  the  Act  requires  directors  to  have  regard  to  following  principles  in 
discharging their core duty: 

361

the likely consequences of any decision in the long term;  
the interests of the company’s employees;  
the  need  to  foster  the  company’s  business  relationships  with  suppliers, 
customers and others;  
the  impact  of  the  company’s  operations  on  the  community  and  the 
environment;  
the desirability of the company maintaining a reputation for high standards of 
business conduct; and  
the need to act fairly as between members of the company.3  

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

The inclusion of ESV principles in the Companies Act was recommended by 
the Company Law Review Committee which undertook a wide-ranging review of 
UK company law during the late 1990s and early 2000s. The Review Committee 
considered  at  some  length  whether  the  duty  of  loyalty  for  directors  of  UK 
companies should retain the shareholder focus of the common law,4 or should be 
reoriented along ‘pluralist’ lines, with directors obliged to give equal weight to 
the  interests  of  constituencies  such  as  company  employees  and  creditors, 
alongside the interests of shareholders.5 The Committee declared itself to be in 
sympathy with the view that business affairs should be conducted with an eye to 
the long term and in a manner that enhanced the welfare of different groups in 
society,  but  felt  that  it  was  important  the  law  placed  a  clear  obligation  on 
directors  that  ensured  focused  and  competitive  management  and  which did not 
turn  them  ‘from  business  decision  makers  into  moral,  political  or  economic 
arbiters’.6 As such, mandatory pluralism was rejected in favour of ESV,7 which 
was offered as a means of retaining the benefits of focused management fostered 
by the shareholder-orientation of the common law duty, but which captured some 
of the inclusive aspects of pluralist approaches to corporate governance.8  

The inclusion of ESV principles in the UK Companies Act gives the duty of 
loyalty in UK law a different look to the common law duty to act ‘bona fide in 
the best interests of the company’9 and to the equivalent statutory provisions in 
Australia  and  New  Zealand.10  But  it  is  not  clear  to  what  extent  the  statutory 
statement of ESV principles has altered the substance of the duty in UK company 
                                                 
3  
4  

Companies Act s 172(1)(a)–(f). 
See, eg, Re Smith and Fawcett Ltd [1942] Ch 304; Greenhalgh v Arderne Cinemas Ltd [1951] Ch 286 
(‘Greenhalgh’). 
On stakeholder company law, see generally John Edward Parkinson, Corporate Power and 
Responsibility: Issues in the Theory of Company Law (Clarendon Press, 1993). For a summary of the 
shareholder and stakeholder approaches, see Andrew Keay, ‘Moving Towards Stakeholderism? 
Constituency Statutes, Enlightened Shareholder Value and More: Much Ado About Little?’ (2011) 22 
European Business Law Review 1, 3–7. 
Company Law Review Steering Group, Modern Company Law for a Competitive Economy: Developing 
the Framework (London, 2000) [2.21]. 
Ibid ch 2.  
Ibid [3.22]. 
Re Smith and Fawcett Ltd [1942] Ch 304. 

7  
8  
9  
10   See, eg, Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) s 181 (‘Corporations Act’) and Companies Act 1993 (NZ) s 131. 

5  

6  

