 

Cognitive Aspects of Public Toilet Design 

 

Jo-Anne Bichard, Julienne Hanson 

Professor of House Form & Culture 

Bartlett Faculty of the Built Environment 
UCL, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT 

{j.bichard, j.hanson@ucl.ac.uk 

 

Clara Greed 

Professor of Inclusive Urban Planning 

Faculty of the Built Environment 

UWE, Coldharbour Lane, Bristol BS16 1QY 

c.greed@uwe.ac.uk 

 

 
 
Abstract 
 
This  paper  reports  ongoing  EPSRC1-  sponsored  research  to  understand  how  ‘away  from  home’  (public)  toilets 
feature  in  disabled  people’s  participation  in  urban  public  life.  After  tracing  the  origins  of  accessible  toilets,  it  will 
examine the technological responses currently in use in many public toilets and evaluate these designs with respect 
to people with cognitive disabilities. The paper  concludes by pinpointing challenges that need to be resolved by 
designers, before the goal of ‘an inclusive public toilet of the future’ can be realized. 
 
 
1  The Origins of Accessible Toilets 
 
At  present,  many  of  the  UK’s  public  toilets  are  not  accessible  to  people  with  physical,  sensory  or  cognitive 
impairments. Kitchen & Law (2001) have argued that this situation severely limits disabled people’s access to the 
city  and  its  resources.  Since  1979  purpose-designed  unisex  public  toilets  have  been  available  under  the  RADAR2 
scheme, in which specifically adapted toilets for people with disabilities are locked and can only be used by those 
who have access to the appropriate key3. This scheme has been considered controversial from the outset because it 
does  not  guarantee that everyone who needs the accessible facility will also have a key. Meanwhile, providing a 
‘disabled  toilet’4 somewhere in the town centre meant that ordinary public toilet facilities need not be universally 
accessible. The approach epitomised the UK attitude to access and social inclusion that was prevalent at the time, 
which  was  to  assume  that  ‘normal’  provision  for  ‘able  bodied’  members  of  the  general  public  should  be 
supplemented by provision to serve the ‘special needs’ of ‘the disabled’.  
 
1.1  Current Toilet Design 
 
The  design  of  the  RADAR  unisex  public  toilet  was  predominately  determined  by  the  requirements  of  wheelchair 
users. The needs of this specific user group have continued to inform further design standards such as the British 
Standard  BS8300  (Figure  1)  and  Approved  Document  M  (ADM)  of  the  Building  Regulations.  More  recently,  the 
Centre of Accessible Environments has produced ‘The Good Loo Design Guide’ which has included specific toilet 
design solutions for people with visual impairments. However, inclusive design implies a broader consultation with 
people  from  a  wide  scope  of  disability  and  other  user  needs.  The  Inclusive  Design  of  Away  From  Home  (Public) 
Toilets in City Centres research looks beyond the issues of access, to areas of universal needs for safety, privacy, 
cleanliness, comfort and dignity whilst using the public toilet. 
 

                                                 
1 We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), grant 
number GR/ S183080/01 Vivacity 2020: Urban Sustainability for the Twenty-four Hour City. 
2 Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation 
3 Members of the public can purchase their own key or are invited to ‘ask for the key’ when needing to use a RADAR locked 
toilet.  
4 Strictly speaking, toilets for disabled people should always be referred to as ‘accessible’ toilets rather then ‘disabled’ toilets, as 
the latter could be deemed offensive and stigmatising. However, in the 1970’s and 1980’s, the term ‘accessible toilet’ was not in 
common  currency.  Pre  2004  legislation  referred  to  ‘toilets  for  disabled  people’  and  many  disabled  people  still  use  the  term 
‘disabled toilet’ today. 

                    

Figure 1: BS8300 (2001) 

 

1.1.1  BS8300 
 
BS8300 (2001) sets the standard for accessible toilets, updating earlier versions that were based on the RADAR 
unisex facility. Unlike previous standards, BS8300 was based on systematic research into disabled people’s needs 
(Feeney, 2003). This included measuring basic body sizes and capabilities but the bulk of the research, which took 
place  over  a  four  year  period  from  1996-2000, was conducted through a programme of experimental trials. These 
included objective measures, such as using a specially constructed rig to plot the reach of 150 ambulant disabled and 
150 wheelchair users, and subjective measures of comfort in respect of the height of fixtures and fittings such as 
toilet  seats,  wash  basins  and  grab  rails.  The  main  objectives  of  the  laboratory  experiments  were  to  verify  the 
standards for a representative sample of disabled people and to permit the costs and practicality of different design 
solutions to be balanced against the proportions of people accommodated. These studies have been criticised for 
placing  too  much  emphasis  on  restricted  mobility,  whilst paying insufficient attention to the needs of people with 
sensory and cognitive impairments or with hidden disabilities such as diabetes, bladder and bowel problems.  
 
For many disabled people the accessible toilet has become symbolic of their access to the city, and although many 
‘accessible’ away from home toilets can be found in UK cities, there continues to be major discrepancies between 
the  design  of  the  facility  and  the  specific  needs  of  a  large  number  of  users.  The  introduction  of  Part  3  of  the 
Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) in October 2004, ensures through legislation that disabled people should be 
able to physically access services. This will have far reaching ramifications in the current design and management of 
UK  public  toilets.  As  a  result, every design aspect of the toilet facility, from the entrance to the exit, furnishings, 
fixtures  and  fittings  will  have  to  be  rethought.  Due  to  the  inaccessibility  of  many  existing  public  toilets,  many  of 
those  controlled  and  managed  by  local  authorities  are  closing,  creating  a  dearth  of  public  toilets  that  affects 
everyone. 
 

