McJUNKIN CORPORATION, Plaintiff and Third-Party Plaintiff-Fourth-Party Plaintiff and

888 F.2d 481 (1989)

Appellant,

v.

MECHANICALS, INC., Defendant,

Alaskan Copper Companies, Inc., Third-Party Defendant-Fourth-Party Defendant and Appellee.

No. 87-3345.

United States Court of Appeals, Sixth Circuit.

Argued March 3, 1988.

Decided November 2, 1989.

Rehearing Denied December 14, 1989.

482

*482 John P. Kiely, Ralph Mitchell (argued), Donald C. Adams, Jr., Rendigs, Fry, Kiely & Dennis, Cincinnati, Ohio, Brian
L. Buzby, Porter, Wright, Morris & Arthur, Columbus, Ohio, for McJunkin Corp.

Douglas E. Hart, Cincinnati, Ohio, for Mechanicals, Inc.

James M. Moore (argued), Cincinnati, Ohio, Gary L. Herfel, Ft. Wright, Ky., for Alaskan Copper Companies, Inc.

Before MERRITT, Chief Judge; KRUPANSKY, Circuit Judge; and ENGEL[*], Senior Circuit Judge.

ENGEL, Senior Circuit Judge.

This conflict requires a court to declare a victor in a classic Uniform Commercial Code "Battle of the Forms" under Ohio
Rev.Code ยง 1302.10, U.C.C. ยง 2-207. We must determine whether, under the facts here, a liability limitation contained in
an acknowledgment form of Appellee Alaskan Copper Companies precludes Appellant McJunkin Corporation from
recovering damages after Alaskan sold it defective goods.

The problem underlying any "battle of the forms" is that parties engaged in commerce have failed to incorporate into one
formal, signed contract the explicit terms of their contractual relationship. Instead, each has been content to rely upon
standard terms which each has included in its purchase orders or acknowledgments, terms which often conflict with
those in the other party's documents. Usually, these standard terms mean little, for a contract looks to its fulfillment and
rarely anticipates its breach. Hope springs eternal in the commercial world and expectations are usually, but not always,
realized. It is only when the good faith expectations of the parties are frustrated that the legal obligations and rights of the
parties must be precisely determined. This case presents a situation typical in any battle of the forms: it is not that the
parties' forms have said too little, but rather that they have said too much yet have expressly agreed upon too little.

483

Generally, where parties engaged in commerce enjoy parity in bargaining power, the Code acknowledges the parties'
autonomy and recognizes the parties' right to agree upon contractual terms which might otherwise violate the Code,
including liability limitations. See Ohio Rev.Code ยง 1301.02 & comment 2. As noted by the late Robert Braucher,
Harvard professor, *483 Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts and member of the Massachusetts
Commission on Uniform State Laws, the Code embodies the principle "that the intent of the parties is the keystone of
choice of law as well as of substantive rules in the field of commercial transactions." Braucher, The Legislative History of
the Uniform Commercial Code, 58 Colum.L.Rev. 798, 811 (1958).

Nevertheless, under the facts of this case, we find that Alaskan's liability limitation is inoperative. While we find that
Alaskan and McJunkin had a contract, we find that the contract existed by virtue of the parties' conduct, not by virtue of
the exchange of forms. Under Ohio Rev.Code ยง 1302.10(C), the contract thus incorporated only those terms upon which

both party's standardized forms agreed; the liability limitation not being a term in McJunkin's purchase order, it did not
bind McJunkin and thus limit recovery.

I.

Emery Industries (Emery), a division of National Distillers & Chemical Corporation (National Distillers), a Virginia
corporation, operates a chemical plant in Cincinnati, Ohio. On April 4, 1983, Emery contracted with Mechanicals, Inc.
(Mechanicals), an Ohio corporation, for installation of a pipe system designed to carry chemicals and fatty acids under
high pressure and temperature. The system required stainless steel "stub ends" (used to connect pipe segments), which
Mechanicals ordered from McJunkin Corporation (McJunkin), a West Virginia corporation. McJunkin in turn ordered
the stub ends from the Alaskan Copper Companies, Inc. (Alaskan) on April 27, 1983, after an agent of McJunkin had
discussed the issue with an agent of Alaskan.

In a purchase order issued to Alaskan, McJunkin set out the following conditions of sale:

1. By acknowledging receipt of this order or by supplying products described herein, Seller agrees to the
terms and conditions set forth herein.

2. Show terms of payment on face of invoice. When invoices subject to discount are not mailed on date of
shipment, discount period will be calculated from date invoice is received at Buyer's Home Office, P.O.
Box 513, Charleston, WV 25322.

3. Extra charges under this order will not be permitted except on specific authority of this office. If freight is
chargeable, paid freight bill must accompany invoice.

4. Delinquency in delivery or otherwise unsatisfactory service will be considered cause for cancellation
and/or rejection at no expense to the Buyer.

5. Seller will certify that the goods and/or services delivered pursuant to this purchase order were
produced and/or performed in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, and Executive Orders.

6. Buyer takes exception to and hereby objects to all hold harmless and indemnity provisions, either
express or implied, which may be set forth in Seller's acceptance that seek to impose liability upon Buyer.

PLEASE ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF THIS ORDER IMMEDIATELY, ADVISING EARLIEST SHIPPING
DATE.

On April 29, Alaskan shipped the stub ends directly to Mechanicals. On May 4, Alaskan then sent McJunkin an
acknowledgment of the order, which contained terms and conditions of sale different from those in McJunkin's purchase
order. In pertinent part, the acknowledgment provided:

6. Disclaimer of warranty. SELLER MAKES NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
(INCLUDING NO WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR PARTICULAR PURPOSE USAGE
OR TRADE) TO ANY PERSON OR ENTITY WITH REGARD TO THE GOODS OR SERVICES COVERED
HEREBY AND FORBIDS PURCHASER TO REPRESENT OTHERWISE TO ANYONE WITH WHICH IT
DEALS.

7. Defects, Inspection, Notification.

484

*484 (a) Purchaser must inspect the goods at its expense within ten (10) days of the receipt thereof and
notify Seller of any claimed defect shortage or inaccuracy therein within ten (10) days thereafter or it shall
be held to have waived its rights to such remedy thereof or recovery thereupon from Seller. If Purchaser
shall have timely notified Seller of alleged defects in the goods and made the goods available for
inspection and testing by Seller, Seller shall determine whether defects exist which are attributable to it

