The Big Bang Theory
Summary:
„Leonard Hofstadter and Sheldon Cooper are both brilliant physicists working at Cal Tech in
Pasadena, California. They are colleagues, best friends, and roommates, although in all capacities
their relationship is always tested primarily by Sheldon's regimented, deeply eccentric, and non-
conventional ways. They are also friends with their Cal Tech colleagues mechanical engineer
Howard Wolowitz and astrophysicist Rajesh Koothrappali. The foursome spend their time working
on their individual work projects, playing video games, watching science-fiction movies, or reading
comic books. As they are self-professed nerds, all have little or no luck with women. When Penny, a
pretty woman and an aspiring actress from Omaha, moves into the apartment across the hall from
Leonard and Sheldon's, Leonard has another aspiration in life, namely to get Penny to be his
girlfriend.“ 

List of Characters:
Johnny Galecki as Leonard Hofstadter:
PhD– An experimental physicist with an IQ of 173, he received his PhD when he was 24 years old.
His mother, Beverly (Christine Baranski), is a neuroscientist and psychiatrist who provided little, if
any, nurturing when Leonard was growing up. Like all of the other major male characters, Leonard
is a nerd who loves video games, comic books, and Dungeons & Dragons. Leonard is also lactose
intolerant. The straight man of the series, he shares an apartment in Pasadena with Sheldon.
Leonard is smitten with his neighbor Penny when they first meet. They briefly date at the end of
season 1 and the start of season 2 and in season 3, they begin a stable romantic relationship,
however they break up at the end of season 3 when Leonard tells Penny he loves her, and she isn't
ready to reciprocate. Leonard also briefly dates Leslie and Dr. Stephanie Barnett (Sara Rue) in
season 2, and in season 4, he becomes seriously involved with Raj's sister Priya (Aarti Mann), a
successful lawyer, but she eventually returns to India and they break up in season 5 when she
admits to having cheated on him. 

Jim Parsons as Sheldon Cooper, M.A., M.S, Ph.D., Sc.D., B.S.:
Originally from Galveston, Texas, Sheldon was a child prodigy with an eidetic memory who began
college at the age of 11 (after completing the fifth grade), started graduate studies at 14, and earned
a PhD at 16. A theoretical physicist researching quantum mechanics and string theory, he has two
doctoral degrees, a PhD, and an Sc.D. However, despite his IQ of 187, he finds many routine
aspects of social situations and life in general difficult to grasp and navigate. His father died when
he was 14, and his mother, Mary (Laurie Metcalf) is a devout Christian. He also has a twin sister,
Missy (Courtney Henggeler), who later has a baby in season 7. Sheldon has a poor grasp of others'
feelings and little or no comprehension of nuances, often questioning others if a comment is
intended as sarcasm. As a result, he is extremely tactless and acts wildly inappropriately much of
the time. He is determined to have his own way, boasts of his superior intelligence, and belittles his
friends'   accomplishments,   making   him   appear   petty   and   childlike.   Sheldon   has   an   extremely
ritualized way of living (e.g., always sitting in the same spot on the sofa, or knocking on a door
three times, each time saying the name of the person he's addressing), and a compulsion to complete
things. He is also wary of germs and dislikes physical contact. Despite all these quirks, in season 4,
he begins a relationship with Amy, who eventually becomes his girlfriend during season 5. 

Kaley Cuoco as Penny:
An aspiring actress from a town outside of Omaha, Nebraska, Penny moves in across the hall from
Sheldon and Leonard in the pilot. She attends casting calls and auditions, but is not very successful.
To pay the bills, she waits and occasionally tends bar at The Cheesecake Factory, although she often
relies on the guys for free food, Wi-Fi, and help paying her rent (Sheldon once called her a
'freeloader'). Penny quits her job in season 7 and at the start of season 8 becomes a pharmaceutical
representative at Zangen after having given up hope of becoming a successful actress, and finally

gains financial independence. Penny attended, but did not graduate from, community college (she
briefly goes back to school in season 6), but has far more common sense and social awareness than
the rest of the gang. Penny is also untidy and frequently drinks alcohol. To date, her surname has
not been revealed and will never be divulged. In season 1 she dates Mike (Andrew Walker), who
she later dumps after he posts details about their sex life on his blog. She briefly dated Stuart in
season 2, and in seasons 3 and 4 dated Zack Johnson (Brian Thomas Smith), a handsome and
friendly yet dim-witted guy, whom she married in Las Vegas (they didn't think weddings in Las
Vegas were real). In season 4, Penny becomes close friends with Bernadette and Amy, and they
often hang out in each other's apartments or go out together. Penny also has a close friendship with
Sheldon, despite his quirks. 

Simon Helberg as Howard Joel Wolowitz, M.Eng.
An aerospace engineer, Howard is Jewish and lives with his mother, Debbie (Carol Ann Susi). His
father left both of them when Howard was 11 and has not been heard from since, with the exception
of a letter on Howard's 18th birthday, which he refused to open. In season 8, he discovers he has a
half-brother, Josh (Matt Bennett). Unlike Sheldon, Leonard, and Raj, Howard lacks a PhD, earning
him Sheldon's scorn. He defends this by pointing out that he has a master's degree in engineering
from the elite MIT and that the apparatus he designs are launched into space, unlike the purely
abstract work of his friends. He himself goes into space at the end of season 5, training as an
astronaut and serving as a payload specialist on the International Space Station, although he often
annoys his friends by constantly talking about space. He has a marked sense of humor, which
Leonard and Raj occasionally appreciate. In the early seasons of the show, Howard fancies himself
a ladies' man and devises outrageous pickup lines (mainly with Penny), which have limited success
with women. In season 3 he starts dating Bernadette, and although they later break up off screen,
they get back together and later get engaged in season 4 and get married at the end of season 5. In
season 6, Howard finally moves out of his mother's house and moves in with Bernadette. Howard
also has a tendency to waste money on ridiculous toys and often argues with Bernadette over money
because of his oddly low income as an engineer and her high income as a pharmaceutical rep,
resulting in Bernadette often giving Howard allowances (Howard calls it a stipend). In season 8,
Howard's mother dies (following Carol Ann Susi's death in 2014), leaving him devastated. He and
Bernadette later move into her home. 

Kunal Nayyar as Rajesh Ramayan "Raj" Koothrappali, PhD
From New Delhi, he works as a particle astrophysicist at Caltech. Raj's family is very wealthy
(Sheldon describes them as "Richie Rich rich"). Over the course of the series, he communicates
with his parents, Dr. and Mrs. V.M. Koothrappali (Brian George and Alice Amter) via webcam (they
later divorce in season 8). Raj is bashful around women and is unable to talk to them for the first six
seasons (except for his mother and his sister) unless he drinks alcohol (or at least thinks he has
drunk it) or takes an experimental medication. Unfortunately, the former causes him to behave
outrageously and unpredictably, while the latter causes unforeseen side effects. Even so, he often
has better luck with women than his overly confident best friend, Howard. Raj also has very
feminine tastes and often takes on a stereotypical female role in his close friendship with Howard,
but he insists that he is not gay. In season 4, his sister Priya stays with him and becomes Leonard's
girlfriend (much to Raj's annoyance). In season 6, Raj meets Lucy (Kate Micucci), who also suffers
from social anxiety, and they begin a relationship. However, Lucy ends the relationship, as she feels
pressured when Raj wants her to meet his friends. Afterwards, a heartbroken Raj finally speaks to
Penny without having consumed alcohol and overcomes his selective mutism. In season 7, he
begins dating Emily, and their relationship later becomes exclusive. Raj also has a Yorkshire Terrier
called Cinnamon, and the gang often joke about how unusually close he is with his dog. 
Sources:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Big_Bang_Theory#Main_cast
http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0898266/?ref_=nv_sr_1

