 

 
 
 

 

 Highlights of Changes from 

 
     DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

Changes made to the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria and texts are outlined in this chapter in the same order 
in which they appear in the DSM-5 classification. This is not an exhaustive guide; minor changes in text 
or wording made for clarity are not described here. It should also be noted that Section I of DSM-5 con-
tains a description of changes pertaining to the chapter organization in DSM-5, the multiaxial system, 
and the introduction of dimensional assessments (in Section III).

Terminology
The phrase “general medical condition” is replaced in DSM-5 with “another medical condition” where 
relevant across all disorders.

Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Developmental Disorder)
Diagnostic criteria for intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) emphasize the need 
for an assessment of both cognitive capacity (IQ) and adaptive functioning. Severity is determined by 
adaptive functioning rather than IQ score. The term mental retardation was used in DSM-IV. However, 
intellectual disability is the term that has come into common use over the past two decades among 
medical, educational, and other professionals, and by the lay public and advocacy groups. Moreover, a 
federal statue in the United States (Public Law 111-256, Rosa’s Law) replaces the term “mental retarda-
tion with intellectual disability. Despite the name change, the deficits in cognitive capacity beginning 
in the developmental period, with the accompanying diagnostic criteria, are considered to constitute a 
mental disorder. The term intellectual developmental disorder was placed in parentheses to reflect the 
World Health Organization’s classification system, which lists “disorders” in the International Classifica-
tion of Diseases (ICD; ICD-11 to be released in 2015) and bases all “disabilities” on the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF). Because the ICD-11 will not be adopted for 
several years, intellectual disability was chosen as the current preferred term with the bridge term for 
the future in parentheses.
 
Communication Disorders
The DSM-5 communication disorders include language disorder (which combines DSM-IV expressive 
and mixed receptive-expressive language disorders), speech sound disorder (a new name for phono-
logical disorder), and childhood-onset fluency disorder (a new name for stuttering). Also included is 
social (pragmatic) communication disorder, a new condition for persistent difficulties in the social uses 
of verbal and nonverbal communication. Because social communication deficits are one component of 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD), it is important to note that social (pragmatic) communication disorder 
cannot be diagnosed in the presence of restricted repetitive behaviors, interests, and activities (the oth-
er component of ASD). The symptoms of some patients diagnosed with DSM-IV pervasive developmen-
tal disorder not otherwise specified may meet the DSM-5 criteria for social communication disorder.

Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism spectrum disorder is a new DSM-5 name that reflects a scientific consensus that four previously 
separate disorders are actually a single condition with different levels of symptom severity in two core 

domains. ASD now encompasses the previous DSM-IV autistic disorder (autism), Asperger’s disorder, 
childhood disintegrative disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified. ASD 
is characterized by 1) deficits in social communication and social interaction and 2) restricted repetitive 
behaviors, interests, and activities (RRBs). Because both components are required for diagnosis of ASD, 
social communication disorder is diagnosed if no RRBs are present.

Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
The diagnostic criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in DSM-5 are similar to those 
in DSM-IV. The same 18 symptoms are used as in DSM-IV, and continue to be divided into two symp-
tom domains (inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity), of which at least six symptoms in one domain 
are required for diagnosis. However, several changes have been made in DSM-5: 1) examples have 
been added to the criterion items to facilitate application across the life span; 2) the cross-situational 
requirement has been strengthened to “several” symptoms in each setting; 3) the onset criterion has 
been changed from “symptoms that caused impairment were present before age 7 years” to “several 
inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were present prior to age 12”; 4) subtypes have been 
replaced with presentation specifiers that map directly to the prior subtypes; 5) a comorbid diagnosis 
with autism spectrum disorder is now allowed; and 6) a symptom threshold change has been made for 
adults, to reflect their substantial evidence of clinically significant ADHD impairment, with the cutoff 
for ADHD of five symptoms, instead of six required for younger persons, both for inattention and for 
hyperactivity and impulsivity. Finally, ADHD was placed in the neurodevelopmental disorders chapter 
to reflect brain developmental correlates with ADHD and the DSM-5 decision to eliminate the DSM-IV 
chapter that includes all diagnoses usually first made in infancy, childhood, or adolescence.

Specific Learning Disorder
Specific learning disorder combines the DSM-IV diagnoses of reading disorder, mathematics disorder, 
disorder of written expression, and learning disorder not otherwise specified. Because learning deficits 
in the areas of reading, written expression, and mathematics commonly occur together, coded speci-
fiers for the deficit types in each area are included. The text acknowledges that specific types of read-
ing deficits are described internationally in various ways as dyslexia and specific types of mathematics 
deficits as dyscalculia.

Motor Disorders
The following motor disorders are included in the DSM-5 neurodevelopmental disorders chapter: devel-
opmental coordination disorder, stereotypic movement disorder, Tourette’s disorder, persistent (chron-
ic) motor or vocal tic disorder, provisional tic disorder, other specified tic disorder, and unspecified tic 
disorder. The tic criteria have been standardized across all of these disorders in this chapter. Stereotypic 
movement disorder has been more clearly differentiated from body-focused repetitive behavior disor-
ders that are in the DSM-5 obsessive-compulsive disorder chapter.

Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Schizophrenia
Two changes were made to DSM-IV Criterion A for schizophrenia. The first change is the elimination 
of the special attribution of bizarre delusions and Schneiderian first-rank auditory hallucinations (e.g., 
two or more voices conversing). In DSM-IV, only one such symptom was needed to meet the diagnostic 
requirement for Criterion A, instead of two of the other listed symptoms. This special attribution was 

2 • Highlights of Changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5

