State Capacity and Economic Development: A Network Approach∗

Daron Acemoglu†

Camilo Garcia-Jimeno‡
October 22, 2014

James A. Robinson§

Abstract

We study the direct and spillover eﬀects of local state capacity using the network of Colombian munici-
palities. We model the determination of local and national state capacity as a network game in which each
municipality, anticipating the choices and spillovers created by other municipalities and the decisions of
the national government, invests in local state capacity and the national government chooses the presence
of the national state across municipalities to maximize its own payoﬀ. We then estimate the parameters of
this model using reduced-form instrumental variables techniques and structurally (with GMM or SMM).
To do so we exploit both the structure of the network of municipalities over which spillovers take place
and the historical roots of local state capacity as the source of exogenous variation. These historical in-
struments are related to the presence of colonial royal roads and local presence of the colonial state in
the 18th century, factors which we argue are unrelated to current provision of public goods and prosper-
ity except through their impact on their own and neighbors’ local state capacity. Our estimates of the
eﬀects of state presence on prosperity are large and also indicate that state capacity decisions are strategic
complements across municipalities. Bringing all municipalities below median state capacity to the median,
without taking into account equilibrium responses of other municipalities increases median fraction of the
population above poverty from 57% to 60%. Approximately 57% of this is due to direct eﬀects and 43% to
spillovers. However, if we take the equilibrium response of other municipalities into account, the median
would instead increase to 68%, a sizable change driven by equilibrium network eﬀects.

JEL Classiﬁcation: H4, H7, P16.
Keywords: Colombia, economic development, networks, public goods, state capacity.

∗We are grateful to Alberto Ciancio, Amanda Culp, and Nicolas Idrobo for superb research assistance, and to the Editor,
ﬁve anonymous referees, Maria Angelica Bautista, Flavio Cunha, Frank Ditraglia, Andrew Foster, Elena Paltseva, James
Poterba, Pascual Restrepo, Petra Todd, Ken Wolpin, Roman Zarate, staﬀ at the Cartographic Modeling Lab at Penn, and
various seminar participants for valuable suggestions. Acemoglu gratefully acknowledges ﬁnancial support from ARO MURI
W911NF-12-1-0509.

†Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. daron@mit.edu
‡Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania. gcamilo@sas.upenn.edu
§Government Department, Harvard University. jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Though we often take for granted the existence of central and local states with the capacity to enforce law
and order, regulate economic activity and provide public goods, many states in less-developed parts of the
world lack this capacity. In Migdal’s (1988, p. 33) words: “In parts of the Third World, the inability of
state leaders to achieve predominance in large areas of their countries has been striking...”

The idea that such state capacity is vital for economic development, though latent in the writings
of Thomas Hobbes and Max Weber, began to attract more attention as a consequence of analyses of the
“East Asian Miracle”. A series of books by Johnson (1982), Amsden (1989), Wade (1990), and Evans (1995)
argued that a key to the economic success of East Asian economies was that they all had states with a
great deal of capacity. Others, such as Herbst (2000) and Centeno (2002), linked the economic failure of
African or Latin American nations to their limited state capacity. This hypothesis also receives support
from the cross-country empirical evidence presented in Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) and the within-country
evidence in Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) and Bandyopadhyay and Green (2012), which ﬁnd a
positive association between measures of (historical) political centralization and present-day outcomes.1

In this paper, we contribute to this literature in several dimensions. We study the eﬀect of state
capacity of Colombian municipalities on public goods provision and prosperity. We conceptualize “state
capacity” as the presence of state functionaries and agencies. This represents one aspect of what Mann
(1986, 1993) calls the “infrastructural power” of the state (see also Soifer, 2008). Colombia provides an
ideal laboratory for such an investigation for several reasons. There is a wide diversity of local state
presence, public goods provision and prosperity across the country, and many important aspects of local
state capacity in Colombia — including notary oﬃces, health centers, health posts, schools, libraries, ﬁre
stations, jails, deed registry oﬃces, tax collection oﬃces, and part of the bureaucracy — are decided at the
local level. Finally, and critically for our empirical strategy, Colombia’s history of colonization provides
us with sources of potential exogenous variation in local state capacity, which we exploit in order to deal
with endogeneity and reverse causality concerns and to isolate the impact of state capacity (rather than
other social and institutional factors). In particular, we focus on the historical presence of colonial state
oﬃcials, colonial state agencies, and the colonial “royal roads” network. The road network, for example,
was partially based on pre-colonial indigenous roads and was overhauled when the modern system of roads
was built in Colombia starting in the 1930s. This network has disappeared and thus provides an attractive
source of variation in the historical presence of the state and the cost of building and expanding local state
capacity (especially when we control for distance to current roads). We exploit this royal road network, as

1Relatedly, Evans and Rauch (2000), Acemoglu (2005), Besley and Persson (2009, 2011), and Dincecco and Katz (2013)
document positive correlations between tax to GDP ratio or measures of meritocracy in the state bureaucracy and eco-
nomic development, and Osafo-Kwaako and Robinson (2013) show a positive correlation between political centralization and
development using ethnographic data on political centralization from the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample.

1

