R E V I E W S

Spectral fingerprints of large-scale 
neuronal interactions

Markus Siegel1*, Tobias H. Donner2* and Andreas K. Engel3

Abstract | Cognition results from interactions among functionally specialized but widely 
distributed brain regions; however, neuroscience has so far largely focused on characterizing 
the function of individual brain regions and neurons therein. Here we discuss recent studies 
that have instead investigated the interactions between brain regions during cognitive 
processes by assessing correlations between neuronal oscillations in different regions of the 
primate cerebral cortex. These studies have opened a new window onto the large-scale 
circuit mechanisms underlying sensorimotor decision-making and top-down attention. We 
propose that frequency-specific neuronal correlations in large-scale cortical networks may 
be ‘fingerprints’ of canonical neuronal computations underlying cognitive processes.

Spectral analysis
A general term for analysis 
techniques (for example, Fourier 
transform or wavelet transform) 
that decompose time domain 
signals into their different 
frequency components.

Multi-microelectrode 
recordings
Simultaneous recordings of 
single- or multi-unit activity 
from multiple electrodes 
implanted in the brain.

1 Centre for Integrative 
Neuroscience, University of 
Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, 
Germany.
2 Department of Psychology, 
University of Amsterdam, 
1018 WB Amsterdam,  
The Netherlands.
3 Department of 
Neurophysiology and 
Pathophysiology, University 
Medical Center Hamburg-
Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, 
Germany.
*These authors contributed 
equally.
Correspondence to M.S. and 
T.H.D. e-mails: markus.
siegel@uni-tuebingen.de; 
t.h.donner@uva.nl 
doi:10.1038/nrn3137
Published online  
11 January 2012

Cognitive processing is highly selective, integrative and 
flexible. This is achieved through the transient forma-
tion of large ‘coalitions of neurons’1, which are widely 
distributed across many brain areas, exchange signals in 
a specific manner and compete with each other. Just as 
in politics, one coalition typically rules until it is over-
turned by another. In the brain, the winning coalition 
governs a percept, thought or action. Thus, understand-
ing the neuronal basis of cognition requires an under-
standing of how transient coalitions of neurons form, 
compete and dissolve.

Around 30 years ago, it was suggested that the syn-
chronization of oscillatory neuronal activity might have 
a key role in the integration of sensory signals during 
perceptual organization2,3. Several investigations into the 
visual system provided evidence for4–9 and against10–12 
this hypothesis. One decade ago, three influential 
Reviews in this journal further highlighted the func-
tional significance of neuronal oscillations for the large-
scale neuronal interactions underlying cognition13–15. 
Since then, several groups have begun to unravel these 
interactions and their dynamics, aided by the develop-
ment of powerful new measurement and analysis tools.
Here, we discuss recent studies characterizing the 
interactions between distant regions of the primate 
cerebral cortex through the study of correlated oscilla-
tions. We use sensorimotor decision-making and top-
down visual attention as showcases. Although most 
other cognitive processes (for example, multisensory 
integration16–19) also involve large-scale interactions, 
we focus on decision-making and attention for two 
reasons. First, both processes critically depend on the 

interaction between neuronal populations located in 
widely separated cortical areas. Second, both have been 
the focus of several recent studies linking interactions 
between brain areas to cognition. These studies showed 
that large-scale cortical interactions typically involve 
frequency-specific, correlated neuronal oscillations. The 
detailed analyses of such frequency-specific interactions 
indicate tight mechanistic links between processes that 
may seem different at the behavioural level of analysis. 
They have also been able to dissociate between seem-
ingly analogous processes. These insights could hardly 
have emerged from analysing only local neuronal activ-
ity patterns. Thus, the evidence discussed in this Review 
suggests that frequency-specific correlated oscillations 
in distributed cortical networks may provide indices, or 
‘fingerprints’, of the network interactions that underlie 
cognitive processes. We propose that these fingerprints 
may index canonical neuronal computations underly-
ing cognition, which are commonly inferred, but not 
directly accessed.

A window onto cortical interactions
We focus on electrophysiological studies that have 
characterized frequency-specific neuronal dynamics 
by means of spectral analysis of non-invasive electroen-
cephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG) 
or invasive multi-microelectrode recordings. Frequency-
specific cortical population signals — which are often 
narrow band and as such reflect neuronal oscillations — 
are markers of the underlying neuronal network interac-
tions2,13,14,20–25. Thus, measures of the association between 
brain areas based on such frequency-specific signals  

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE 

 VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 121

© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

Blood oxygen 
level-dependent functional 
MRI
(BOLD fMRI). Brain imaging 
technique that measures the 
haemodynamic response to 
neural activity based on 
changes in blood oxygenation.

Sensor level
The level of the sensors, which 
record neuronal mass activity 
(for example, electroencepha-
lography electrodes or magne-
toencephalography sensors). 
Each sensor-level signal 
constitutes a linear mixture of 
the signals generated by many 
neuronal sources.

Source reconstruction
Estimation of the sources of 
neuronal activity that underlie 
the electromagnetic signals 
measured at distant electroen-
cephalography or magnetoen-
cephalography sensors.

Effective connectivity
The influence one neuronal 
system exerts on another; in 
many studies it is measured by 
quantifying Granger causality.

a

Phase coherence

(FIG. 1) are likely to provide more detailed information than 
corresponding measures based on broadband electro-
physiological signals or the blood oxygen level-dependent  
functional MRI (BOLD fMRI) signal.

The coupling between neuronal oscillations in differ-
ent brain regions has been commonly assessed in terms 
of either the correlation of their relative phase (‘phase 
coherence’) or, on a slower timescale, the correlation of 
their amplitude envelopes (here referred to as ‘amplitude 
correlation’) (FIG. 1). Inter-areal interactions can also be 
assessed by determining correlations between BOLD 
fMRI signals measured in different brain regions26. The 
link between measures of cortical interactions based 
on frequency-specific electrophysiological signals and 
measures of cortical interactions based on the BOLD 
fMRI signal is discussed in BOX 1. It is important to be 
aware that the relationships between interaction meas-
ures based on electrophysiology and fMRI are far from 
simple, and that these measures may reflect different 
neuronal circuit mechanisms. Furthermore, attempts to 
study cortical large-scale interactions face several serious 
methodological challenges (BOX 2). For EEG and MEG, 
field spread (BOX 2) severely limits the use of correlational 
measures at the sensor level. Thus, we focus on EEG and 
MEG studies that used source reconstruction techniques 
to assess either amplitude correlation or phase coher-
ence between neuronal oscillations in different cortical 
regions. In the following paragraphs, we briefly discuss 
the neurophysiological basis and significance of both 
measures.

b Amplitude correlation

∆phase = 0

∆phase  ≠ 0

f1 = f2

f1 ≠ f2

Figure 1 | Phase coherence and amplitude correlation of oscillations. a | Phase 
coherence quantifies the consistency of the relative phase between two simultaneous 
signals that have the same frequency. The left panel shows an example of two  
oscillatory signals that are phase coherent with zero phase lag. Signals can also be phase 
coherent with non-zero phase lag (right panel), that is, they can be phase-shifted relative 
to each other. b | Amplitude correlation is a measure of the correlation of the envelopes 
(shown in red) of two simultaneous oscillatory signals (amplitude correlation is also often 
referred to as ‘power-to-power correlation’ or ‘amplitude–amplitude coupling’). 
Amplitude correlation can be measured between oscillatory signals of the same or 
different underlying carrier frequencies. Furthermore, amplitudes can be positively 
correlated or negatively correlated (that is, anti-correlated). The panels show examples 
of a positive amplitude correlation between two oscillatory signals of the same (left) and 
different (right) underlying carrier frequencies. Importantly, phase coherence and 
amplitude correlation are independent of one another. This is exemplified in the left 
panel of part b, in which the amplitudes of the two oscillations are correlated but the 
underlying oscillations are not phase coherent. f, frequency.

Nature Reviews | Neuroscience

Neuronal phase coherence (FIG. 1a) is not just a sta-
tistical quantity: it may also have a direct functional role 
in regulating neuronal communication between brain 
regions14,15,27. This may be achieved in two ways. First, 
synchronization of presynaptic spikes within a sending 
neuronal population in one or several cortical areas may 
enhance this population’s impact on postsynaptic neurons 
located in a receiving area if neurons in the receiving area 
act as ‘coincidence detectors’15,28,29. Evidence suggests that 
this is the case: synchronous presynaptic spikes are more 
effective in driving postsynaptic cortical neurons than 
non-synchronized inputs30–32, in particular in the bal-
anced excitation and inhibition regime that is common 
in cortical networks15,33. Enhanced functional connectivity 
through presynaptic synchronization can be potentially 
assessed by determining either the amplitude correlation 
(see below) or the phase coherence between sending and 
receiving cortical regions. Second, the phase alignment 
of oscillatory signals between sending and receiving neu-
ronal populations located in two cortical areas may itself 
regulate the effective connectivity between these regions27,34. 
Sub-threshold membrane potential oscillations induce 
rhythmic changes in neuronal excitability20,35,36, and 
presynaptic spikes that are aligned to the excitable phase 
of such postsynaptic oscillations are more likely to drive 
spiking activity at the postsynaptic stage27,34.

Amplitude  correlation  is  a  measure  of  the  co- 
modulation of the amplitude envelopes (that is, of the 
power) of oscillations in two areas37(FIG. 1b). In the pri-
mate cerebral cortex, amplitude correlations predomi-
nantly occur at low frequencies (<0.1 Hz)38 and seem to 
be closely linked to slow co-modulations of spontane-
ous fMRI signal fluctuations in distant cortical regions39 
(BOX 1). During cognitive tasks, amplitude correlation is 
also evident at faster timescales — on a trial-by-trial or 
within-trial basis — and between different oscillation fre-
quencies. The mechanistic interpretation, and thus the 
functional significance, of amplitude correlation is less 
clear than the mechanistic interpretation of phase coher-
ence. One possibility is that amplitude correlations reflect 
state changes coupled across brain networks that might 
be driven by neuromodulatory systems and that may be 
important for coordinating cortical processing on slow 
timescales38,40. Several studies using amplitude correla-
tion have provided important insights into large-scale 
interactions even between cortical areas that are only 
indirectly connected through polysynaptic pathways41–44. 
Thus, amplitude correlation is an informative index of the 
large-scale cortical interactions that mediate cognition.
In principle, phase coherence and amplitude correlation 
are independent of one another37. For example, the ampli-
tude envelopes of the oscillatory responses of two regions 
can co-vary strongly even if their phases are randomly  
distributed (FIG. 1b). The reverse can be true as well.

New evidence on large-scale interactions
During  goal-directed,  sensory-guided  behaviour, 
sensory signals are continuously transformed into 
action plans in a highly flexible fashion. The underly-
ing sensorimotor transformations rely on both feed-
forward45–50 and feedback42,50–62 interactions between 

122 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 

 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

