This article was downloaded by: [Seoul National University]
On: 14 January 2015, At: 07:05
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Polymer Reviews
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/lmsc20
X-ray Scattering for the Monitoring of
Processes in Polymer Materials with
Fiber Symmetry
Norbert Stribeck a
a Department of Chemistry , University of Hamburg , Hamburg,
Germany
Published online: 22 Feb 2010.

To cite this article: Norbert Stribeck (2010) X-ray Scattering for the Monitoring of
Processes in Polymer Materials with Fiber Symmetry, Polymer Reviews, 50:1, 40-58, DOI:
10.1080/15583720903503478

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15583720903503478

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Journal of Macromolecular Science R(cid:1)
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1558-3724 print / 1558-3716 online
DOI: 10.1080/15583720903503478

, Part C: Polymer Reviews, 50:40–58, 2010

X-ray Scattering for the Monitoring of Processes

in Polymer Materials with Fiber Symmetry

NORBERT STRIBECK

Department of Chemistry, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany

Synchrotron facilities with improved equipment will grant the execution of very advanced
scattering experiments to every interested polymer scientist. The patterns recorded
are two-dimensional, high-resolution, and low-noise images. They permit to monitor
structure evolution during the processing of polymer materials with repeat rates of
several Hertz. In a different class of novel experiments the structure gradient inside
of graded polymer materials will be determined with a spatial resolution of less than
1 µm. Scattering patterns must be complete. In order both to record complete patterns,
and to evaluate them within tolerable time it appears reasonable to study parts with
ﬁber symmetry. In the present paper a review of corresponding methodical work and
the results of test experiments is presented that has recently been compiled in the group
of the author.

Keywords

polymers, ﬁbers, WAXD, SAXS, tomography

1. Introduction

Presently we are experiencing that intense, reliable X-ray sources and fast detectors become
generally available. At DESY in Hamburg PETRA III will provide one of the most brilliant
X-ray sources worldwide. There less than a second will be sufﬁcient to expose a low-
noise two-dimensional (2D) scattering pattern of a polymer sample. Moreover, in detector
development a similar breakthrough has been achieved. Cycle times of less than a second
can easily be realized with the novel PILATUS1, 2 detectors.

It may be objected that for a long time low-noise scattering curves can be recorded with
repeat frequencies of several Hertz. Nevertheless, the value of those older data is limited.
Either the material is exhibiting isotropic scattering—in this case a comprehensive analysis
requires assumptions on the structure (e.g. the assumption of an ideal lamellar stack).
Or the material is anisotropic—then a measured curve does not describe the complete
scattering pattern or the old 2D pattern is noisy. On the other hand, by application of the
new technology it will become possible for many polymer scientists to monitor the structure
evolution in oriented polymer materials in real time. The results of such experiments offer
the potential to strengthen the understanding of structure evolution mechanisms in polymers.
Moreover, the new instruments provide very narrow X-ray beams with diameters of less
than 1 µm (“microbeams”) that permit to study the variation of structure inside the material
with respective spatial resolution. A complete sweep of a polymer ﬁber by a microbeam

Received September 21, 2009; accepted November 5, 2009.
Address correspondence to Norbert Stribeck, Department of Chemistry, University of Hamburg,

D-20146 Hamburg, Germany. E-mail: norbert@stribeck.de

40

Downloaded by [Seoul National University] at 07:05 14 January 2015 