MODERN ANGLO-AMERICAN LITERARY THEORY

A HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 

COURSE NO.: 7.110108, MODULE V1

THURSDAYS, 12:00-14:00

WS 2014/2015

ROOM: 41/111

Jatin Wagle
Tel.: 0541-969-6033              
Email: jatin.wagle@uni-osnabrueck.de 

 

Ofﬁce hours: Tuesdays, 11:00-12:00

          

1

THE TASKS FOR TODAY…

1. Recap?
2. Discussion of Hans Bertens, 
“Reading for form II: French 
structuralism, 
1950-1975,” (2001) from 
Literary Theory: The Basics

2

QUESTIONS ON BERTENS, “READING FOR FORM II: FRENCH 

STRUCTURALISM, 1950-1975”

1. Why is structure even more important to the French structuralists than 

form? (Johanna)

2. What is the difference between how the nineteenth century linguists and the 

grammarians studied language and how Ferdinand de Saussure does so? 
(Neleh), or What is so special about Saussure’s approach to language, 
especially in contrast to other approaches more popular in his times? (Silke)
3. What is the so called principle of differentiation? (Silke) And how is meaning 
connected to this principle, according to Saussure? (Katja) And, then: Which 
counterintuitive argument about the principle of difference does Saussure 
introduce? (Moritz), or Why do differences play such a big role when it 
comes to the system of signs and their meanings? (Friederike)

4. How are form and meaning of a linguistic sign related to each other? (Marita)
5. According to Bertens, why can't a signiﬁed be an object in the real world? 

(Friederike)

3

QUESTIONS ON BERTENS, “READING FOR FORM II”

6. What does Saussure mean when he argues, “our reality is in fact constituted by 
our language”? (Claudia), or Explain the statement, “Language precedes thought 
and constitutes the framework within which thought must necessarily operate.” 
What is the underlying theoretical concept in this statement? (Marie). And, then: 
According to Saussure, how is meaning constituted? How does this assumption 
lead to the view of 'linguistic determinism'? (Nadine)
In what way is the relationship between a cultural sign and the meaning ascribed 
to it arbitrary? And why might it not be arbitrary in some cases? (Laura)

7.

8. Bertens points out that for Lévi-Strauss the structure of primitive thinking is 

binary. What does Lévi-Strauss mean by that? (Friederike)

9. What makes anthropological structuralism “anti-humanist” and “ahistorical”? 

(Laura), or Bertens states, that anthropological structuralism takes up a ﬁrmly anti-
humanist position. How? (Friederike)

10. What is Roland Barthes’ theory of semiology? Do you think it is still relevant? 

(Julia)

4

