R E V I E W S

BACTERIOCINS: DEVELOPING 
INNATE IMMUNITY FOR FOOD
Paul D. Cotter*, Colin Hill* and R. Paul Ross‡
Abstract | Bacteriocins are bacterially produced antimicrobial peptides with narrow or broad host 
ranges. Many bacteriocins are produced by food-grade lactic acid bacteria, a phenomenon 
which offers food scientists the possibility of directing or preventing the development of specific 
bacterial species in food. This can be particularly useful in preservation or food safety 
applications, but also has implications for the development of desirable flora in fermented food. 
In this sense, bacteriocins can be used to confer a rudimentary form of innate immunity to 
foodstuffs, helping processors extend their control over the food flora long after manufacture.

F O O D  M I C R O B I O LO G Y

 

Perhaps the oldest and most widespread antimicrobial 
strategy in living systems is the use of antimicrobial 
peptides by the innate immune systems of many forms 
of life, from insects to plants to humans. Antimicrobial 
peptides can be fast acting and have broad-spectrum 
activity, which diminishes the possibility of resis-
tance developing in target species. One example of 
anti microbial peptides are the defensins, such as the 
α-defensins, which are produced by neutrophils in the 
small intestine and which act to reinforce the physical 
barriers of the mucosal surface. However, the pro-
duction of antimicrobial peptides is not confined to 
multi cellular organisms. BACTERIOCINS are ribosomally 
synthesized antimicrobial peptides produced by one 
bacterium that are active against other bacteria, either 
in the same species (narrow spectrum), or across 
genera (broad spectrum) and, as with host defence 
peptides1, cell signalling mechanisms can also be 
involved. Producer organisms are immune to their own 
bacteriocin(s), a property that is mediated by specific 
immunity proteins.

It has been suggested that between 30–99% of the 
Bacteria and Archaea make at least one bacteriocin2,3, 
although genome analyses should ultimately provide 
a more definitive figure4,5. Many bacteriocins are 
produced by food-grade lactic acid bacteria (LAB), 
and this offers the possibility of manipulating food 
microbial ecosystems in a deliberate fashion — for 

example, by using bacteriocins to protect food against 
contamination with, or prevent the growth of, specific 
pathogenic bacteria. Alternatively, narrow-host-range 
bacteriocins can be used to influence a microbial 
population in a specific ecosystem towards a particu-
lar outcome in which a desirable strain predominates 
(competitive exclusion). In this sense, bacteriocins can 
potentially be used as a form of innate immunity in 
food to augment physical, physiological (for example, 
pH) and chemical preservatives, and to influence the 
probable final population in complex food systems.

The first description of bacteriocin-mediated inhi-
bition was reported 80 years ago, when antagonism 
between strains of Escherichia coli was first disco vered6. 
Originally called ‘colicins’, to reflect the original pro-
ducer organism, gene-encoded antimicrobial peptides 
produced by bacteria are now referred to as ‘bacterio-
cins’. Although the deliberate use of bacteriocins as 
preservatives in food was formally proposed in 1951 
REF. 7, it is likely that mankind has benefited from 
the serendipitous production of bacteriocins in food 
in the 8,000 years since cheese and other fermented 
foods were first manufactured. Many studies have 
revealed that the LAB used in cheese manufacture to 
convert lactose to lactic acid also produce bacteriocins 
that can influence the composition of the complex 
cheese microflora and potentially inhibit adventitious 
spoilage or pathogenic bacteria. Importantly, in 1928 

BACTERIOCINS
Bacterially produced, small, 
heat-stable peptides that are 
active against other bacteria and 
to which the producer has a 
specific immunity mechanism. 
Bacteriocins can have a narrow 
or broad target spectrum.

Alimentary Pharmabiotic 
Centre, *Microbiology 
Department, University 
College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
‡Moorepark Biotechnology 
Centre, Teagasc, Cork, 
Ireland.
Correspondence to C.H. 
e-mail: c.hill@ucc.ie
doi:10.1038/nrmicro1240

NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 VOLUME 3 | OCTOBER 2005 | 777

R E V I E W S

Timeline | Milestones in the commercial development of nisin

Colicins first described6.  Nisin discovered9.

Nisin first marketed 
in England.

European Union 
approval11.

1925 

1928 

1933 

1947 

1953 

1969 

1983 

1988

LAB bacteriocins 
first described8.

Nisin named10.

Food and Agriculture Organization/
World Health Organization approval.

US Food and Drug 
Agency approval.

it was observed that certain lactococcal strains had an 
inhibitory effect on the growth of other LAB8. A pro-
teinaceous antimicrobial was also described in 1933 in 
New Zealand9 and, in 1947, the responsible bacteriocin 
was named nisin (or group N inhibitory substance)10 
TIMELINE. Nisin was first marketed in England in 1953 
and has since been approved for use in over 48 coun-
tries. Notably, nisin was assessed to be safe for food 
use by the Joint Food and Agriculture Organization/
World Heath Organization Expert Committee on Food 
Additives in 1969. In 1983, this bacteriocin was added 
to the European food additive list as number E234 
REF. 11 and, in 1988, it was approved by the US Food 
and Drug Agency (FDA) for use in pasteurized, 
processed cheese spreads.

The successful development of nisin from an initial 
biological observation through regulatory approval to 
commercial application is a model that has stimulated 
a marked resurgence in bacteriocin research in recent 
years, but similar success with other bacteriocins has 
yet to be repeated on the same scale. In spite of this 
sobering fact, we remain convinced that bacteriocins 
can be exploited in food in various imaginative and 
commercially important applications. However, to 
fully realize this potential, it is first necessary to under-
stand the biology of bacteriocins, and, in particular, 
to elucidate their structure–function relationships, 
production, immunity, regulation and mode of action.

Biology of bacteriocins
Bacteriocins can be defined as bacterially produced, 
small, heat-stable peptides that are active against 
other bacteria and to which the producer has a spe-
cific immunity mechanism. The bacteriocins that will 
probably have the most immediate potential in food 
applications will be those produced by food-grade 
LAB, as they are more likely to meet with regula-
tory approval owing to their origin, and they can be 
readily introduced into fermented foods without any 
concentration or purification. Bacteriocins that are 
produced by LAB can be broad or narrow spectrum, 
but in general, activity is directed against low-GC 
Gram-positive species. Activity against Gram-negative 
bacteria has been shown, but usually only in situations 
where the integrity of the outer membrane has been 
compromised.

LANTIBIOTIC
Lanthionine-containing 
bacteriocins. Lanthionines are 
formed when a dehydrated 
serine or threonine is covalently 
bridged (through the sulphur 
atom) with a cysteine.

BACTERIOLYSINS 
Large, heat-labile, lytic proteins 
produced by bacteria.

LIPID II
Lipid II (Undecaprenyl-
pyrophosphate–
MurNAc(pentapeptide)–
GlcNAc) has an essential role in 
peptidoglycan synthesis by 
translocating the peptidoglycan 
subunits across the cell 
membrane. Lipid II is also the 
target of vancomycin, the drug 
of last resort in the treatment of 
MRSA.

Bacteriocins are a heterogeneous group of peptides 
and proteins and as many as five main classes of LAB 
bacteriocins have been mooted12–14. We propose that 
this classification scheme should be revised and sug-
gest such a revision in TABLE 1. The proposed revised 
classification scheme divides the bacteriocins into two 
distinct categories: the lanthionine-containing LANTI
BIOTICS (class I) and the non-lanthionine-containing 
bacteriocins (class II), while moving the large, heat-
labile murein hydrolases (formerly class III bacterio-
cins) to a separate designation called ‘BACTERIOLYSINS’. It 
has recently been proposed that circular LAB bacterio-
cins should be regarded as class V bacteriocins14. We 
suggest that these should be included in the non-
lanthionine-containing class II category. Class IV 
was a classification reserved for bacteriocins that 
require non-proteinaceous moieties for activity, but 
no members of this class have been convincingly 
demonstrated as yet, and so we have not included 
this class in the new proposal.

Class I bacteriocins (lantibiotics). The lantibiotics 
(lanthionine-containing antibiotics) are small peptides 
(19–38 amino acids in length) that possess the epony-
mous lanthionine or β-methyllanthionine residues 
(FIG. 1). These unusual residues form covalent bridges 
between amino acids, which results in internal ‘rings’ 
and gives lantibiotics their characteristic structural 
features. Furthermore, lantibiotics can contain other 
unusual residues that result from post-translational 
modification, including the substitution of d-alanines 
for l-serines15–17.

The lantibiotics can be divided on the basis of their 
structure and mode of action. In general, the elon-
gated amphiphilic cationic lantibiotics (for example, 
nisin) are active through the formation of pores, 
leading to the dissipation of membrane potential and 
the efflux of small metabolites from sensitive cells. 
By contrast, the globular lantibiotics (for example, 
mersacidin) were originally defined as those lantibi-
otics that act through enzyme inhibition18. However, 
it has now been established that nisin possesses 
both mechanisms of action and that others, such 
as lacticin 3147, a two-peptide lantibiotic, function 
through the cooperative activity of two lanthionine-
containing peptides. Their complex structures make 
the lantibiotics a difficult group to subclassify; this 
is illustrated by a recent suggestion that they can be 
subdivided into 11 subgroups based on the sequences 
of the unmodified pro-peptides19. Some lantibiotics 
are active in the single nanomolar range; that is, their 
activity is several orders of magnitude higher than that 
displayed by the antimicrobial peptides encountered 
in the innate immune system.

Although a precise mechanism of action has not 
been elucidated for every lantibiotic, it is apparent 
that a docking molecule or target is involved, which 
has been established as LIPID II in several cases20–24. The 
binding of nisin to lipid II facilitates a dual mechanism 
of action involving the prevention of peptidoglycan 
synthesis and pore formation20,21. Nisin seems to have 

778 | OCTOBER 2005 | VOLUME 3 

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 

 www.nature.com/reviews/micro

