Toward a computational theory of conscious processing 

Stanislas Dehaene, Lucie Charles, Jean-Remi King and Sebastien Marti 

Current Opinion in Neurobiology (2014), 25: 76–84

Abstract 
The study of the mechanisms of conscious processing has become a productive area of cognitive 
neuroscience. Here we review some of the recent behavioral and neuroscience data, with the speciﬁc 
goal of constraining present and future theories of the computations underlying conscious processing. 
Experimental ﬁndings imply that most  of the brain’s computations can be performed  in a non-
conscious mode, but that conscious perception is characterized by an ampliﬁcation, global propagation 
and integration of brain signals. A comparison of these data with major theoretical proposals suggests 
that   ﬁrstly,   conscious   access   must   be   carefully  distinguished   from  selective   attention;   secondly, 
conscious perception may be likened to a non-linear decision that ‘ignites’ a network of distributed 
areas;  thirdly,  information  which  is  selected  for  conscious  perception  gains  access  to  additional 
computations, including temporary maintenance, global sharing, and ﬂexible routing; and ﬁnally, 
measures of the complexity, long-distance correlation and integration of brain signals provide reliable 
indices of conscious processing, clinically relevant to patients recovering from coma. 

Figure 1. Flexible information routing and conscious processing in large-scale models of the cortex. Original 
depiction of the Dehaene-Changeux model of a Global Neuronal Workspace (Dehaene, Kerszberg & Changeux, 
1998). The GNW model proposes that what we subjectively experience as a conscious state is the global 
availability of the corresponding information. Conscious access would occur when a piece of information enters 
a distributed network of cortical areas tightly interconnected by long-distance axons, the GNW, which allows its 
flexible broadcasting to any of the brain’s many specialized processors.

Conclusion
Empirically, several candidate markers of conscious processing are now available. Theoretically, we 
reviewed three speciﬁc theoretical proposals that tentatively relate conscious processing, respectively, 
to   global   ignition,   long-distance   broadcasting,   and   information   integration.  These   ideas   are   not 
necessarily incompatible. On the contrary, considerable convergence exists to suggest that ﬁrstly, 
conscious access triggers an all-or-none change in the state of distributed cortical networks; secondly, 
conscious processing corresponds to a massive cortico-cortical exchange of information, allowing 
ﬂexible routing and therefore the slow serial performance of novel and arbitrary tasks; and ﬁnally, the 
state of consciousness, that is the brain’s very ability to host a ceaseless stream of such all-or-none 
conscious episodes, rests upon the integrity of long-distance cortico-cortical exchanges, which can be 
continuously modulated by lesions or anesthetics and is reﬂected by electrophysiological indices of 
brain-wide information sharing.

