INFANCY, 7(2),  183-206 
Copyright 0 2005, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

The Developmental Trajectory 

of Nonadjacent Dependency Learning 

Rebecca G6mez 

Department of Psychology 

University of Arizona 

Jessica Maye 

Depurtment of Communication Sciences and Disorders 

Northwestern  University 

We investigated the developmental trajectory of nonadjacent dependency learning in 
an artificial language. Infants were exposed to  1 of 2 artificial languages with utter- 
ances of the form [aXc or bXd] (Grammar 1) or [aXd or bXc] (Grammar 2). In both 
languages, the grammaticality of an utterance depended on the relation between the 
1 st and 3rd elements, whereas the intervening element varied freely. High variability 
of the middle element is known to contribute to perception of nonadjacent dependen- 
cies (Gbmez, 2002). but the developmental trajectory of such learning is unknown. 
Experiment  1 replicated the study of Gbmez with a younger age group and a more 
subtle variability manipulation. Twelve-month-olds failed to track nonadjacent de- 
pendencies under conditions tested here (Experiments 2a and 2b), but by  15 months, 
infants are beginning to track this structure (Experiment 3). Such learning has impli- 
cations for understanding how infants might begin to acquire similar structure in nat- 
ural language. 

Much work has focused on how infants might learn adjacent dependencies in se- 
quential  structure. For instance, Kirkham, Slemmer, and Johnson  (2002) showed 
that by 2 months of age, infants can track co-occurrence frequencies in streams of 
visually presented objects. By 8 months, infants can track conditional probabilities 
in running speech ( A s h ,  Saffran, & Newport,  1998; Saffran, A s h ,  & Newport, 
1996) and in visually presented scenes (Fiser & A s h ,  2002). By  12 months, they 

Requests for reprints shouId be sent to Rebecca GCtmez, Department of Psychology, University of 

Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721LOo68. E-mail: rgomez@u.arizona.edu 

184 

G6MEZ AND MAYE 

track sequences of words in strings (Gcimez & Gerken, 1999; Mintz,  1996; Saffran 
& Wilson,  2003). Thus, infants are adept at processing  associative  structure.  In- 
deed, much of this work is reminiscent of themes found in early associationist ap- 
proaches  to language acquisition  (e.g., Harris,  1955). However,  criticisms  of the 
early associationist  work centered on the argument that the hierarchical  structure 
underpinning  language could not be learned from associations  between  adjacent 
elements (Chomsky,  1957). 

Researchers have begun investigating how infants might learn nonadjacent  se- 
quential  dependencies (Gcimez, 2002;  Santelmann  & Jusczyk,  1998)’  Such de- 
pendencies  (also referred  to as discontinuous  or remotely  connected  dependen- 
cies) are extremely difficult to acquire (see Newport & A s h ,  2000,2004), but play 
an important role in language. In English, linguistic  material intervenes between 
morphosyntactically  dependent auxiliaries  and  inflectional  morphemes (e.g.,  is 
happily  singing, has hurriedly  walked) and between  nouns and verbs in number 
and tense agreement  (e.g., the birds in the trees are singing, the one who crosses 
the line first is the winner). As such, learning dependencies between nonadjacent 
words and morphemes is fundamental in acquiring the syntax of the language. This 
study examines when and how infants detect such structure. 

Previous research with natural language shows that by  18 months infants track 
nonadjacent  dependencies  over  as  many  as  three  intervening  morphemes 
(Santelmann  & Jusczyk,  1998). Infants this age were able to distinguish  phrases 
like “is running” from “can running” and “is quickly running” from “can quickly 
running.”  Gdmez (2002) replicated  the Santelmann and Jusczyk (1998) findings 
with 18-month-olds in an artificial language paradigm and also explored a mech- 
anism  by  which 
infants  acquire  nonadjacent  dependencies.  She  exposed 
18-month-olds to one of two artificial languages: In Grammar 1 (Gl), sentences fol- 
lowed the patterns uXc or hXd (e.g..  pel-wadim-jic,  vot-kicq-rud, vot-wadim-rud), 
whereas in Grammar 2 (G2), the relation between the first and third elements was 
reversed to aXd or bXc, such that pel sentences ended with rud, and vot sentences 
ended with jic (e.g., pel-wadim-rud, vot-kicey-jic, vot-wudim-jic). Thus, in both 
languages, a and b elements were restricted to initial position, whereas c and d ele- 
ments were restricted to final position. The two languages differed only in the rela- 
tion between  initial and final elements; for example, in G1, pel sentences ended 
withjic, whereas in G2, pel sentences ended with rud. The same set of X elements 
occurred in both grammars, and X elements varied freely without restriction. This 
resulted in identical relations between adjacent elements in the two grammars; in 
both G1 and G2, pel and vot could each be followed by any of the X elements, and 
any of the X  elements could  precede  rud or jic.  Because the two grammars are 

‘Researchers have also investigated such learning with adults (see G6rnez. 2002; Newport & A s h ,  
2000, 2004; Onnis, Christiansen, Chater, & G6rnez.  2003; Peiia,  Bonatti, Nespor,  & Mehler, 2002; 
Permchet, Tyler, Galland, & Peerernan. 2004). 

