 
 
 
THE  “Red  Death”  had  long  devastated  the  country.  No 
pestilence had ever been so fatal, or so hideous. Blood was 
its Avatar and its seal—the redness and the horror of blood. 
There  were  sharp  pains,  and  sudden  dizziness,  and  then 
profuse bleeding at the pores, with dissolution. The scarlet 
stains  upon  the  body  and  especially  upon  the  face  of  the 
victim, were the pest ban which shut him out from the aid 
and  from  the  sympathy  of  his  fellow-men.  And  the  whole 
seizure,  progress,  and  termination  of  the  disease,  were  the 
incidents of half an hour.  
But the Prince Prospero was happy and dauntless and 
sagacious.  When  his  dominions  were  half  depopulated,  he 
summoned to his presence a thousand hale and light-hearted 
friends from among the knights and dames of his court, and 
with  these  retired  to  the  deep  seclusion  of  one  of  his 
castellated  abbeys.  This  was  an  extensive  and  magnificent 
structure,  the  creation  of  the  prince’s  own  eccentric  yet 
august taste. A strong and lofty wall girdled it in. This wall 
had  gates  of  iron.  The  courtiers,  having  entered,  brought 
furnaces  and  massy  hammers  and  welded  the  bolts.  They 
resolved to leave means neither of ingress nor egress to the 
sudden  impulses  of  despair  or  of  frenzy  from  within.  The 
abbey  was  amply  provisioned.  With  such  precautions  the 
courtiers might bid defiance to contagion. The external world 
could  take  care  of  itself.  In  the  meantime  it  was  folly  to 
grieve,  or  to  think.  The  prince  had  provided  all  the 
appliances  of  pleasure.  There  were  buffoons,  there  were 
improvisatori, 
there  were 
musicians, there was Beauty, there was wine. All these and 
security were within. Without was the “Red Death.”  

there  were  ballet-dancers, 

3 

4 

THE  MASQUE  OF  THE  RED  DEATH 

It was towards the close of the fifth or sixth month of 
his seclusion, and while the pestilence raged most furiously 
abroad,  that  the  Prince  Prospero  entertained  his  thousand 
friends at a masked ball of the most unusual magnificence.  
It was a voluptuous scene, that masquerade. But first let 
me  tell  of  the  rooms  in  which  it  was  held.  These  were 
seven—an  imperial  suite.  In  many  palaces,  however,  such 
suites form a long and straight vista, while the folding doors 
slide back nearly to the walls on either hand, so that the view 
of the whole extent is scarcely impeded. Here the case was 
very different, as might have been expected from the duke’s 
love  of  the  bizarre.  The  apartments  were  so  irregularly 
disposed that the vision embraced but little more than one at 
a  time.  There  was  a  sharp  turn  at  every  twenty  or  thirty 
yards, and at each turn a novel effect. To the right and left, in 
the middle of each wall, a tall and narrow Gothic window 
looked  out  upon  a  closed  corridor  which  pursued  the 
windings of the suite. These windows were of stained glass 
whose color varied in accordance with the prevailing hue of 
the decorations of the chamber into which it opened. That at 
the eastern extremity was hung, for example, in blue—and 
vividly  blue  were  its  windows.  The  second  chamber  was 
purple  in  its  ornaments  and  tapestries,  and  here  the  panes 
were purple. The third was green throughout, and so were 
the  casements.  The  fourth  was  furnished  and  lighted  with 
orange—the  fifth  with  white—the  sixth  with  violet.  The 
seventh  apartment  was  closely  shrouded  in  black  velvet 
tapestries that hung all over the ceiling and down the walls, 
falling in heavy folds upon a carpet of the same material and 
hue.  But  in  this  chamber  only,  the  color  of  the  windows 
failed  to  correspond  with  the  decorations.  The  panes  here 
were  scarlet—a  deep  blood  color.  Now  in  no  one  of  the 
seven apartments was there any lamp or candelabrum, amid 

