University of Osnabrück 
Faculty of Linguistics and Literary Studies 
Winter Semester 2014/15 
20th-Century African-American Drama 
Instructor: Dr. phil. Sabine N. Meyer 
Jasmin Aarabi, Annemarie Breicher, Laura Miete,  
Katharina Schönfelder, Maik Linnemann, 
Luisa Sprehe, Aileen Villwock, Melanie Willuhn 
Session on Amiri Baraka’s Dutchman 
26th November, 2014 and 3rd December, 2014 

 
DEFINITIONS 

Theatre of cruelty 

A term introduced by the French actor Antonin Artaud in a series of manifestos in the 1930s, 
collected  as  Le  Théâtre  et  son  double  (1938).  It  refers  to  his  projected  revolution  in  drama, 
whereby  the  rational  ‘theatre  of  psychology’  was  to  be  replaced  by  a  more  physical  and 
primitive rite intended to shock the audience into an awareness of life's cruelty and violence. 
The  idea,  derived  partly  from  Surrealism,  was  that  the  audience  should  undergo  a  catharsis 
through  being  possessed  by  a  ‘plague’  or  epidemic  of  irrational  responses.  Artaud’s  own 
attempts to put this theory into dramatic practice failed, and he was locked up for some time 
as  a  lunatic.  Some  later  dramatists,  though,  have  developed  these  principles  more 
successfully:  a  celebrated  instance  was  Peter  Brook's  production  in  1964  of  Peter  Weiss's 
Marat/Sade. (“Theatre of cruelty”)  
 
Black Revolutionary Theatre 

The Black Revolutionary Theatre represents an attempt to racialize the Artaudian “theatre of 
cruelty” by instigating its audience to act in revolutionary and violent ways to overthrow the 
white-dominated American social order. (Piggford 75) 

 

QUOTES 

Racism 

LULA.  I  was.  But  only  after  I’d  turned  around  and  saw  you  staring  through  that  window 
down in the vicinity of my ass and legs. (p. 7) 

LULA. You look like you been trying to grow a beard. That’s exactly how you look like. You 
look  like  you  live  in  New  Jersey  with  your  parents  and  are  trying  to  grow  a  beard.  That’s 
what. You look like you’ve been reading Chinese poetry and drinking lukewarm sugarless tea. 
[Laughs, uncrossing and recrossing her legs] You look like death eating a soda cracker. (p. 8) 

LULA. You tried to make it with your sister when you were ten. […] But I succeeded a few 
weeks ago. (p. 9) 

LULA. I told you I didn’t know anything about you … you’re a well-known type. (p. 11) 

LULA. I bet your name is… something like… uh, Gerald or Walter. Huh? 

CLAY. God, no. 

LULA.  Lloyd,  Norman?  One  of  those  helpless  colored  names  creeping  out  New  Jersey. 
Leonard? Gag…. (p. 15)  

LULA. Everything you say is wrong. [Mock smile] That’s what makes you so attractive. Ha. 
In  that  funnybook  jacket  with  all  the  buttons.  [More  animate,  taking  hold  of  his  jacket] 
What’ve you got that jacket and tie on in all this heat for? And why’re you wearing a jacket 
and tie like that? Did your people ever burn witches or start revolutions over the price of tea? 
Boy, those narrow-shoulder clothes come from a tradition you ought to feel oppressed by. A 
three-button  suit.  What  right  do  you  have  to  be  wearing  a  three-button  suit  and  striped  tie? 
Your grandfather was a slave, he didn’t go to Harvard. (p. 18) 

LULA. Boy, are you corny. I take back what I said before. Everything you say is not wrong. 
It’s perfect. You should be on television. (p. 19) 

LULA. May the people accept you as a ghost of the future. And love you, that you might not 
kill them when you can.  

CLAY. What? 

LULA.  You’re  a  murderer,  Clay,  and  you  know  it.  [Her  voice  darkening  with  significance] 
You know goddamn well what I mean. (p. 21) 

LULA. And we’ll pretend the people cannot see you. […] And that you are free of your own 
history. (p. 21)  

LULA. Oh yeah. About them more that I know about you. Do they frighten you? 

CLAY. Frighten me? Why should they frighten me?  

LULA. ’Cause you’re an escaped nigger. 

CLAY. Yeah? 

LULA. ’Cause you crawled through the wire and made tracks to my side. (p. 29) 

LULA.  […]  Ten  little  niggers  sitting  on  a  limb,  but  none  of  them  ever  looked  like  him. 
[Pointing to CLAY […]] (p. 30) 

LULA. Come on, Clay… let’s do the thing, Uhh! Uhh! Clay! Clay! You middle-class black 
bastard. Forget your social-working mother for a few seconds and let’s knock stomachs. Clay, 
you liver-lipped white man. You would-be Christian. You ain’t no nigger, you’re just a dirty 
white man. Get up, Clay. Dance with me, Clay. (p. 31) 

LULA. […] jackets buttoning up to your chin, so full of white man’s words. Christ. God. Get 
up  and  scream  at  these  people.  Like  scream  meaningless  shit  in  these  hopeless  faces.  […] 
Clay, you got to break out. Don’t sit there dying the way they want you to die. […] (p. 31) 

LULA.  […]  Screw  yourself,  Uncle  Tom…  I  mean,  Uncle  Thomas  Woolly-Head.  With  old 
white matted name. He hobbles on his wooden cane. Old Tom. Old Tom. Let the white man 

