Society for Cinema & Media Studies

Sitcoms and Single Moms: Representations of Feminism on American TV
Author(s): Lauren Rabinovitz
Source: Cinema Journal, Vol. 29, No. 1 (Autumn, 1989), pp. 3-19
Published by: University of Texas Press on behalf of the Society for Cinema & Media Studies
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1225298 .
Accessed: 02/08/2013 07:53

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

University of Texas Press and Society for Cinema & Media Studies are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Cinema Journal.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Sitcoms and Single Moms: Representations of 
Feminism on American TV 
by Lauren Rabinovitz 

Among American broadcast television practices, the situation comedy constructed 
around a single white career woman or mother emerged in the 1970s as a preferred 
fictional site for a "feminist" subject position. Such examples as The Mary Tyler 
Moore Show, One Day at a  Time, and Alice are representative of the television 
industry's attempt to  draw upon feminist consciousness raising as a contextual 
frame. Popular critics frequently agree that "Mary" symbolized the independent 
woman of  the  1970s.'  Some critics have actually gone  so far as to  claim that 
Alice's subliminal message is  "Sisterhood Is  Powerful" or that One  Day  at  a 
Time is about television's "first feminist."2 Periodicals aimed exclusively at female 
audiences (including Ms., Vogue, McCalls, Glamour, and Working Woman) have 
cited Alice, One Day  at  a  Time, and  The Mary Tyler Moore Show (MTM) as 
exemplary feminist representations, and have particularly hailed Kate & Allie as 
the  progressive outcome  of  such  a  continuous line.3 These  TV  shows  make 
feminism meaningful (as cultural values and social practice) only within the ways 
that past and present sitcoms, television's general representation of women, and 
topical  issues admit  and  circulate notions of  feminism.  The  genre's political 
feminism must also conform to American television's material base, a governing 
system of  economic  exchange that functions to  renegotiate sociopolitical "dif- 
ference" as a cultural affirmation of patriarchal values. The sitcom of the  1970s 
and 1980s thus offers a reformist or liberal feminism as "progressive" even while 
it simultaneously works to disavow it. 

Television scholars have  already identified the  ways  in  which  particular 
television  texts identified as  "feminist" redirect independent, assertive female 
characters into safely traditional female categories. Arguing that central female 
characters must be  returned ultimately to the conventional narrative structures 
of family melodrama or heterosexual romance, critics have demonstrated that a 
woman's position can only be inscribed narratively in relationship to male pre- 
rogatives. For example, Serafina Bathrick notes how the  narrative trajectory of 
The  Mary  Tyler Moore Show  textually repositions Mary-the 
single,  profes- 
sionally minded  independent  woman-into  romantic or familial categories so 
that  she  emerges  as  a  self-sacrificing, nurturant figure of  True  Womanhood.4 
Robert Deming  agrees that while  MTM "might have opened up a new  repre- 
Lauren Rabinovitz is an assistant professor of Communication Studies and American 
Studies at the University of Iowa. Her book, Points of Resistance: Women, Power and 
Politics in the New York Avant-Garde Cinema, 1943-1971, is forthcoming from Uni- 
versity of Illinois Press. 
?  1989 Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois 

Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989  3 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

sentational space  for female  audiences...  several forces of  containment were 
already in place, working against that space."5 By way of illustration, he reminds 
one of the fact that MTM condensed one dominant institution (the family) with 
another (the workplace). 

Bathrick also demonstrates how star discourse about Mary Tyler Moore, the 
actress and producer, further reinforced the textual containment. She cites how 
the  press foregrounded Moore's image  as  wife  and  mother-the  opposite of, 
rather than a  reflection of,  her character-as  an important framework for in- 
terpreting and  accepting  Mary's definition inside  traditionally defined gender 
categories.6 Valerie Harper in Rhoda underwent the same treatment, reassuring 
her viewers in a 1977 Ladies Home Journal article that she/Valerie would reveal 
the secret that saved her real marriage even while Rhoda was divorcing her TV 
husband.7 More recently, the popular press has placed Jane Curtin and Susan St. 
James-the  actresses who  play two  urban, independent, single mothers living 
together in Kate & Allie-in  a professional context only insofar as their acting 
careers did  not  interfere with  their duties as  wives  (and mothers).8 Even  the 
structure and direction of a 1986 TV Guide article was dependent upon separate 
interviews with  Curtin and St. James that probed the  issue of  competitiveness 
between them, counteracting the cooperative spirit and the comraderie of their 
characters.9 

Within more fully elaborated models of television institutions and processes, 
Laurie Schulze has explored similar narrative redirection in  the  made-for-tele- 
vision movie.  Schulze argues that such narrative strategies, interpreted by  the 
viewer within literary, cinematic, and TV frames of  reference, activate female 
protagonists as  "meaningful" only  within  the  bounds of  romance and  family 
melodrama, and that this textual practice suppresses that which threatens dom- 
inant patriarchal values.'? Schulze, in  particular, develops her argument from 
theoretical positions put forward by Stuart Hall, David Morley, John Fiske, and 
others." Hall's model provides a basis for understanding how cultural frameworks 
of  knowledge, production relations, and technical infrastructures interact both 
for the TV product to be realized as multiple discourses and, at a differentiated 
moment, for that product to be received and understood as multiple and shifting 
discourses within  social practice. Hall's model  is especially helpful for under- 
standing how any inscription of feminism in American sitcoms is a complicated 
process of interrelationships among the economic determinants and function of 
commercial broadcast television, the discursive language of televisual texts and 
intertextuality, and the cultural milieu of the  1970s and 1980s. 

Feminism--both  as a  term and as a  social practice -  was throughout the 
1970s and is today a sign of an oppositional political practice. Throughout the 
1970s, feminist consciousness raising, changing public policy regarding affirmative 
action and wages in employment, and widespread discussion about the proposed 
Equal Rights Amendment made certain feminist issues of enormous topical in- 
terest. But feminism's association with abortion, lesbianism, and the dissolution 
of the nuclear family has provoked hotly angered responses and protests. Fem- 
4  Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

inism's  widescale  absorption of  social,  political,  and  psychological issues has 
engendered  a  community of  fractured responses. There is  not one  monolithic 
feminism but  many  feminisms that  run the  gamut from radical to  liberal to 
conservative. E.  Ann  Kaplan supports such  a  definition of  feminism  in  her 
summary of  feminist critical positions and research on  television in  the  1970s 
and  1980s.12 She  relies largely upon  critical work investigating women's con- 
struction in  film melodramas and TV soap operas as the  area most developed. 
Not  surprisingly, many feminist scholars have turned to these genres that spe- 
cifically address a female spectator as the most productive site for their exami- 
nation of text and viewer relationships. 

But one must also look beyond genres traditionally coded as melodrama in 
order to understand TV's liberal feminist subject as a ubiquitous one. Lynn Joyrich 
argues persuasively that melodrama itself as a "feminine" form has "engulfed" 
television and structurally invaded all TV fictional genres. She asserts that the 
discursive connections forged between  melodrama and  postmodern consumer 
culture position all  viewers as idealized female spectators and susceptible con- 
sumers.'3 

If, as Joyrich argues, melodrama is the  preferred television aesthetic form 
and the  "feminine" its pervasive spectatorial address, then  the  sitcom as TV's 
dominant fictional category becomes an especially plentiful site for such address. 
Not classifiably "comic" in  the sense of theatrical traditions, the sitcom admits 
humorous dialogue in self-contained plots that revolve around characters, and it 
constructs intensified psychological relations in intimate (often domestic), detailed 
settings.'4 It relies on exactly those codes of film and television melodrama that 
have marked melodrama as "feminine." The threat of sitcom feminization, there- 
fore,  dovetails  with  the  genre's  recent  articulation of  a  specifically feminist 
discourse, which, in turn, inscribes liberal ideological positions as well as positions 
of  refusal. This  is  not  to  claim  that individual spectators must adopt any  one 
political  category of  reading, but  that  notions of  feminism as  well  as  female 
identification are constructed as a range of possibilities. Deming summarizes this 
view  when  he  states that, "Television's construction of  versions of female sub- 
jectivity  is,  then,  likely  to  involve  great heterogeneity and  multiplicity, even 
contradictory subject positions for its audience to inhabit-as  these are available 
and  inscribed in  both  texts and  the  audience's own  social formations."'5 The 
television show Kate & Allie, popularly received as a progressive show because 
of its marks of feminist discourse, is an example of the recent sitcom's ability to 
inscribe, blur, and diffuse feminist attitudes that are distinct, mutually antagonistic, 
and necessarily contradictory. 

Kate  & Allie: A Case  Study.  An illustration of this activity is available in the 
debut of Kate & Allie, originally broadcast 19 March 1984. The credit scene sets 
a pattern for all future episode openings; each has the same musical theme, title 
credits, and New  York location, intercut with  a medium two-shot of  Kate and 
Allie  involved  in  the  good-natured banter of  two  women friends. In  the  very 
Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989  5 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

first such opening,  two  casually dressed, affluent, white  women  in  their mid- 
thirties-Kate  and  Allie-walk  out  of  a  movie  theater. Centered within  the 
frame, they walk left to a poster of An  Unmarried Woman. Before the women 
even speak, they are coupled with a media icon for liberal feminist consciousness. 
The poster here denotes a famous movie about a newly divorced woman learning 
to  be  independent and self-assertive. It also signifies the  empathy for a  single 
woman's plight  that made the  movie  successful as a  woman's discourse. Kate 
supports the reading available to those who participated in this discourse when 
she asserts, "I still love that movie." 

But when Allie says that she did not empathize, she offers a simple contrast 
to Kate's "liberated" woman. Her refusal to see why Jill Clayburgh did not go 
off with  Alan Bates at  the  end  of  the  movie  is  humorous if  the  spectator has 
already adopted Kate's reading of An  Unmarried Woman. Allie then stands in 
for a conservative belief in romance that politically contrasts the film's proclaimed 
feminist stance of  "self-actualization." 

But difference here does not necessarily provide conflict. The even  modu- 
lation of  the  two  women's voices,  their direct eye  contact, and  their equally 
centered positions oppose the weight of visual media discourse that pitches two 
women who disagree into competition. The scene draws upon the discourse of 
An Unmarried Woman itself for its moments of female solidarity among women 
friends. This discourse, which was an important aspect of Hollywood's women's 
films of  the  1970s, now  provides a  significant coding  of  Kate & Allie  that is 
activated in the show's opening moment.'6 (It is also a discourse that was further 
opposed by  such extratextual events as the  TV Guide article or the  actresses' 
own inflammatory competition at past Emmy award shows.) 

Visually and verbally weighted with Kate, Allie also offers the possibility of 
identification to  radical feminists. Allie's very  words-"Hey,  he  had  a  loft.  I 
could  find myself  in  a  loft.  I  could  find myself in  bed  with  Alan Bates in  a 
loft" -allude 
to the propertied, privileged status of both Bates's and Clayburgh's 
characters. Allie continues her argument regarding Clayburgh's missed oppor- 
tunity to stay with Bates by summing up, ". . . and if he leaves, she gets the loft." 
Kate responds, "I don't want to go  to the  movies with  you anymore." It is at 
this point that Allie can also serve as an unwitting accomplice for the spectator 
who critiqued An  Unmarried Woman's ignorance of class issues. 

All  other  "intros" repeat this  pattern. Kate represents the  "enlightened" 
liberal feminist whereas Allie consistently articulates a  position of  refusal that 
could  serve a  spectator whose  frame of  reference is  either a  traditional (pre- 
feminist) ideological position or a more politically leftist oppositional one. It is 
not important who gets "the last word" because Allie always makes the last joke. 

Television  Address  and  Women  Consumers.  It is also important to consider 
here  that the  production of  meaning derives neither entirely from individual 
texts nor from television discourse as a system of intertextual address. Whereas 
some television critics have defined television as an unproblematic conduit for 
6  Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

ideology, Dallas W. Smythe proposes that the audience be seen not as the receiver/ 
consumer for "packages of ideology," but as the commodity itself which is sold 
to advertisers.'7 One can truly understand American television's articulations of 
feminism only when they are connected to the broadcast industry's attempts to 
deliver women as an audience of consumers to television advertisers. The generic 
address of  "feminism" occurred because of  the  needs  of  American television 
executives to cultivate programming that could be identified with target audiences 
whom they wanted to measure for advertising agencies. 

During the early  1970s American network programming executives coop- 
erated with advertising salespeople to convince advertisers that rating numbers 
alone did  not matter so much as the  audience rating composition by  sex, age, 
and income. Fewer customers could look relatively more valuable if they earned 
more and spent more.'8 Daytime television had for years organized its fiction, 
formats, and commercial advertisements around a specifically homogeneous group 
defined  as  female,  married, and  housebound. But  prime-time television  only 
followed suit when the increasingly specific audience data supplied by the ratings 
services suggested an economic cultural shift in purchasing power.'9 Foreseeing 
a national economic shift in consumption stimulated by the baby boom generation 
coming  of  age,  advertising agencies began  earmarking two-thirds of  their ad- 
vertising budgets  to  address consumers under  fifty, and  television  executives 
merely followed suit by catering their products to the  "demographic" products 
(the  audience)  for which  the  advertisers were  looking.20 The  extent to  which 
such  strategies became  thoroughly internalized policies  in  the  1980s  is  best 
summarized by CBS broadcast vice president for research David Poltrack: "The 
affluent, upscale woman between twenty-five and fifty-four is [now] the primary 
target of advertisers."2' 

Television executives expected  to  accomplish their ends by  programming 
shows that featured liberal politics and values as well as younger, urban characters. 
They hoped that new  marks of racial or gender specificity and topics of social 
relevancy would appeal to the target audiences.22 By labeling this broadcasting 
trend "affirmative access," one popular book on television even succumbs to the 
industry's rhetoric and conflates the fictional subjects with the social audiences.23 
In  1986,  Glamour magazine's July issue went  even  further, telling  its  female 
readers, "A flip of  the  [TV] dial  is  your power to  shape the  way  women  are 
depicted."24 Popular books and periodicals presume that female audiences have 
shared life  experiences and values that are being  incorporated in  TV  fictions; 
they also assume that television is an ideological mirror of a democratic culture. 
Such mass media encourage the popular notion that sitcoms and other shows are 
the simple outcome of a women's culture, while increasing numbers of television's 
fictional products work to galvanize women spectators as a significant economic 
product. 

Single-Mom  Sitcoms.  Between  1975  and  1985,  no  less  than  ten  half-hour 
situation comedies focused on  white  single  mothers in  similar social, familial, 
Cinema Journal 29, No. 1, Fall 1989  7 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

and  psychological circumstances. Phyllis  (1975),  One  Day  at  a  Time  (1976), 
Alice  (1978), I'm a  Big  Girl Now  (1980), Love, Sidney (1981), The Two of  Us 
(1981), Gloria (1982), Goodnight Beantown (1983), and It's  Your Move (1984) 
featured white  biological mothers (widowed in  some  examples but  more fre- 
quently divorced) and their children, while foregrounding male friends or rel- 
atives. When the featured male was not a relative, he was necessarily established 
as an unsuitable sexual mate for the woman through his difference in age, class, 
political biases, or sexual preference. Narrative and character situations revolved 
around mother-child relations, the  woman's relationships to  work family  and 
domestic family  (in some cases these are overlapped or intersecting), and the 
woman's internal conflicts as she attempted to "cope" a la An Unmarried Woman 
(even  such  titles as I'm  a  Big  Girl Now  or One  Day  at  a  Time  identify  the 
woman's tentative assertiveness). 

Such shows owe  much  to  the  broad iconographic outlines of  the  family 
sitcom popular in the 1950s and 1960s and even more to the single-parent sitcoms 
introduced as a  regular generic permutation in  the  1960s.25 The  independent- 
mother sitcoms of the 1970s perpetuated the same parameters of a nuclear family 
structure by  incorporating the male friends or relatives as symbolic patriarchs. 
In the more recent examples the male figures may be closely identified with the 
centrally represented space because they retain an important economic proprie- 
tary relationship to it. Alice, for example, ambiguously intertwines the professional 
and familial realms in its character relationships as well as in its narrative crises. 
But by  making "Mel's Diner" the  dominant space, the  sitcom naturalizes the 
inclusion of the diner's owner and cook as a male adult among the cast regulars. 
Although Alice's apartment appears as a secondary (domestic) space, it becomes 
an important representational site for narrative action primarily in such episodes 
as when Mel loses the diner and sets up shop in Alice's apartment or when Mel 
visits, throws his back out, and is forced to take up residence as a domineering 
invalid in  Alice's living room. 

One Day at a Time is representative of the ways that these situation comedies 
contain their "liberated moms" by inscribing liberal feminism only within tra- 
ditional male-female relationships and female sexual representation. Unlike Kate 
& Allie's "variations-on-a-theme" opening that privileges the women's relation- 
ship within a recognizable structure, One Day's beginning credit sequence repeats 
and, indeed, overdetermines traditional male/female power relations at the outset 
of each episode.26 The male characters possess the power of vision whereas the 
women are figured primarily as the  objects of male sight. When Ann Romano 
and her two teenage daughters are introduced as a group, they are followed by 
a close-up of Ann's boyfriend as he gazes offscreen at them. A second adult man 
also becomes a representation of the text's male subjective voice when his close- 
up scrutiny of the females' departing figures is emphasized. The final wide shot 
of Ann's apartment interior reinforces the way that the power of sight constructs 
gender  position: while  the  female  figures move  unselfconsciously in  the  fore- 

8  Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

ground, the  men survey them from central positions in  the  middle- and back- 
grounds. 

The  "All-Purpose  Sex  Episode":  Take One.  An analysis of an entire episode 
demonstrates the way in which One Day at  a  Time's "feminism" is dependent 
upon patriarchal authority. This particular episode (initially broadcast 10 February 
1976), like many that serve the single-mother format, allows one to concentrate 
and focus on the particular tensions that contribute to the adult female character's 
definitive status as a single parent because it is about her intensified relationships 
with her adolescent daughters. The single-mom sitcom exacerbates those tensions 
of  "absent father-present mother" identified by  Nancy  Chodorow as basic to 
consumer society's nuclear family structures.7 Thus, according to Chodorow, the 
decline  or  distanciation of  the  adolescent daughter's oedipal  father  (whether 
actually present in  the  home or not) creates an idealization of masculinity and 
an orientation to external authority. Granting such ideological priority to men, 
the daughter rebels against the power wielded by the accessible mother: "A girl 
alternates between total rejection of a mother who represents infantile dependence 
and attachment to her, between identification with anyone other than the mother 
and feeling herself her mother's double and extension. Her mother often mirrors 
her preoccupations."28 It is particularly around the collapse of maternal authority 
in  the  mother-daughter relationship that  the  sitcom  pins  its  construction of 
feminism-tying  feminist subjectivity both to the adult female's uncertain familial 
position and the adolescent female's vacillating obedience to cultural authorities. 
In  the  episode  at  hand,  16-year-old daughter Julie tells  Ann  that  she  is 
thinking of having sex with her boyfriend. The questions that Julie's ambivalence 
express to her mother are: Is sexual liberation moral? Does it extend to 16-year- 
olds?  What  will  Julie  decide  to  do?  What  will  Ann  say? Although multiple 
possibilities for audience identification exist in  Ann, daughter Julie, Ann's boy- 
friend  David  as  the  symbolic present father, and  even  the  younger daughter 
Barbara, the text privileges Ann as the preferred subject. Receiving the greatest 
visual weight, Ann expresses escalating ambivalence about what motherly advice 
she should offer to Julie. She "mirrors" Julie's position and alternates between 
accepting or rejecting her own advice as the solution to Julie's questions. With 
this narrative development, the  conflict shifts from sexual freedom as a  social 
issue and Julie's personal decision to Ann's maternal dilemma. As Julie's potential 
narrative position as the dominant subject is undercut in relation to Ann's visual 
direction and  comic  verbal control-she  gets  all  the  punch  lines-so 
sexual 
propriety and mores also are quickly suppressed as the main issue. 

When Ann subsequently talks to her boyfriend, she maintains visual authority 
in order to acknowledge to a male figure her inability to function as a parental 
authority. (Their conversation allows narrative repetition-a  device  built into 
much of television's dramatic structure thereby ensuring that even  intermittent 
attention will  still guarantee narrative sense.) Once  Ann admits her dilemma, 
the doorbell rings, and almost simultaneously, the second male enters. Whenever 

Cinema Journal 29, No. 1, Fall 1989  9 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Ann  expresses uncertainty, this  character's entrance (expected because it  is  a 
regular feature of  the  program) functions as a caricature of contrast-the  site 
of overly masculine bravado. Further, accompanied by soundtrack applause and 
the actor's pause as he waits for the applause to subside, the moment becomes 
privileged within the conventions of televisual style. 

Once Schneider, the macho building superintendent, offers to help Ann, he 
makes smart remarks about her "feminine" dilemma. His presence and activity 
instigate Julie's discovery that her mother has betrayed her confidence, and she 
announces that she will sleep with her boyfriend that very night. Although the 
scene ends with Ann's close-up reaction shot, it is Schneider's actions, not Ann's, 
that have  directed the  cause-and-effect sequence of  events and controlled the 
narrative flow. 

In the  next scene,  morality and sexual liberation are momentarily reposi- 
tioned as a social issue but only as the object of jokes that diffuse potential political 
tensions. They  provide an  entr'acte of  vaudevillesque humor as  Barbara and 
David  do  the  dishes.  Once  Julie and  Ann enter, the  topic  shifts back to  the 
mechanics of proper parenting. When David suggests that he will talk to Julie's 
boyfriend in order to stop the sexual pressure being levied on her, he reintroduces 
both Julie's and Ann's initial problems and offers a potential resolution. But now 
the  narrative reneges  on  the  issue  of  how  Ann  will  handle  the  problem by 
abdicating her responsibility in favor of David's. 

David's solution, however, carries limited narrative authority. Shifting the 
attention to David's dilemma, Ann asks, "Do you think you can handle this?" In 
both  language and  visual construction, David  duplicates Ann's tentativeness- 
perhaps doubling and authorizing womanly indecision as a  liberal parent's in- 
decision. The ringing doorbell again punctuates expressions of ambivalence, and 
Schneider's entrance again functions as a further contrast to David's uncertainty. 
Schneider's "solution" of physical confrontation quite literally reframes the problem 
in traditional masculine terms when he and David visually square off over it. 

When  David  next escorts Julie's boyfriend to  the  bathroom for a  private 
talk, the scene is a mise-en-scene overloaded with feminine trappings. Nonutil- 
itarian accessories throughout the overdecorated room are pink, frilly, or furry; 
lingerie dangles from hooks in the background. In a parody of "girl talk," David 
and  the  boyfriend discuss Julie's feelings.  Although role  reversal may  be  the 
subject for comic  play here, it  is still the  males only who act upon and direct 
the narrative's questions, even if it means trying on traditionally feminine roles 
and values and even  mother-daughter relationships. 

The result is that the boyfriend's onscreen agreement to stop pressuring Julie 
is immediately undercut by a quick cut to Julie's next date, where she is trying 
to  resist the  boy's advances. The  visual negation of  David's solution suggests 
David's ineffectuality as a "mother." Reinforcing this effect, David now tells Ann 
not to worry about Julie. Ann expresses that she is worried, adopting a traditionally 
correct maternal stance at precisely the  right moment when  such concern has 
been motivated by events about which only the spectator knows. The spectator's 

1  0  Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

omniscience may encourage sympathy with Ann or Julie as a subject. But their 
characters' potentials for control and direction are negated through Ann's passivity 
and Julie's brief visual inscription. 

In the final scene, Julie enters her mother's apartment and explains to Ann 
that the  correct decision is to  act on what "she wants," and she indicates that 
she did not have sex because she did not desire it. If the earlier deflected issue 
of Julie's decision is now ultimately resolved as an offscreeen discovery of self- 
worth, it remains unmotivated by any onscreen events. David and Ann respond 
to Julie with an exchange of glances; then David looks at Ann as she says to the 
camera, "Barbara's next." The resulting gap in Julie's narrative closure can best 
be  filled in  by  Ann Romano's ongoing position as a passive subject or David's 
superficially "feminized" male. Ann Romano's position as a feminist is articulated 
solely through the narrative importance attached to her tentative ability to cope, 
an emotional ambivalence reinforced by her closing freeze-frame. 

Ann's role revolves around the  presentation of how  she will  function as a 
mother. But the serial-episodic format reconciles her to maternal survival, end- 
lessly postponing her expressed desire for emotional control and direction. The 
only models that she has available are Schneider's rigidly binary view of sexual 
politics and David's equally bifurcated outlook as he enthusiastically "tries on" 
values and actions stereotypically associated with  the  feminine. As Jane Feuer 
bluntly described their situation, "The 1970s sitcoms dealt with liberal messages 
within a narrative form limited by  its conservatism."29 When examined within 
the  dynamics of  the  text, Ann (or Julie) only operate within fixed positions of 
female passive resistance. 

The  "Progressive"  Single-Mom  Sitcom:  Kate & Allie. I have made this long 
excursion through One Day at  a  Time in order to identify the generic horizon 
for Kate & Allie when it first appeared in 1984. K&A producer Bill Persky even 
described the show using terms that suggest an ideological debt to Ann Romano's 
representation of feminism: "The situation of 'Kate & Allie' is a halfway house- 
a respite, not a life goal. But within that it's...  about learning to be yourself so 
you can be with someone else out of choice-not  desperation."30 The main thing 
that distinguished Kate & Allie from the  preceding pack of independent-mom 
sitcoms exemplified by One Day  at a  Time was that it portrayed two divorced 
mothers living together. 

The male friend or relative necessary to the familial structure of the  1970s 
sitcoms had been  replaced by a woman. In the early episodes, however, Kate's 
inability to  cook was  narratively interjected in  various ways  at  least once  an 
episode while  it was similarly repeated that she worked at a travel agency and 
was the signatory lessee of the apartment that she shared with Allie. Kate thus 
assumes the proprietary position over both the central domestic space and mas- 
culine prerogatives traditionally associated with the male figure. Meanwhile, Allie 
was  shown  preparing complicated  meals,  menu  planning,  wallpapering, and 
wielding gourmet cooking utensils, all of which attested to her skills as a home- 

Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989  11 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

maker and her position in  the  traditional domestic nurturant role. Once  these 
character differences were established through such repetitions, however, their 
articulations became both softened and diminished.31 

Thus, within such traditional iconographic patterns, Kate & Allie perpetuates 
conflicts of  female  independence  and  the  search for female  self-actualization. 
But because the binary oppositions (male domestic parent/female domestic par- 
ent) initially expressed are articulated through two female characters, the char- 
acterizations themselves are more fluid and interchangeable so that either may 
assume the passive-resistant role in relationship to the other's narrative direction. 
The sitcom's true novelty then is not that it promises a political feminist agenda 
but that it offers a structure for female assertiveness and control. By structurally 
doubling  the  female  position  seeking  self-actualization, Kate  &  Allie  admits 
alternative, conflicting, and  potentially disruptive values  associated with  the 
representation of more narratively active feminism even if it also upholds values 
of dominant liberal feminism. 

The  women's  representation as  friends serves as  an  ongoing  visual and 
narrative reference point for the  show. Each week's episode begins with their 
inscription as good friends. Kate and Allie are visually framed inside some bit 
of  Manhattan scenery while  they  discuss in  an ironically humorous mode any 
one  of  a  number of  stereotyped topics of  harmless "girl talk"-good-looking 
men,  motherhood, old  boyfriends, growing  old,  other  women's  clothes.  The 
ensuing plot problem, crisis, and reconciliation are presented as an extension of 
Kate and Allie's opening dialogue. This is not to say, however, that the narrative 
is an extension of the topic of their conversation. It is, rather, that the women's 
relationship functions as  the  dominant feature that directs the  narrative. For 
example, each individual scene culminates not in a dramatic action or psycho- 
logical crisis per se  (as in  One Day  at  a  Time) but by returning to a two-shot 
character interaction between  Kate and  Allie.32 Although the  episodes follow 
visual conventions that emphasize movements from wide  establishing shots to 
medium and close shots of characters speaking and reacting, they singularize the 
space inhabited by both Kate and Allie together as the reference point to which 
the camera must always return. Each scene thus pivots on a dialogue between 
Kate and Allie. 

For example, when college students invite Allie to a political demonstration 
about a topic in  which she has expressed commitment, her personal indecision 
spatial leap  to  the  domestic space that Kate 
motivates two  kinds of  shifts-a 
and Allie share and a narrative shift that allows redefining the problem as both 
Kate's and Allie's. Just like the initial social topic introduced in  One Day at  a 
Time, the invitation itself poses a possible narrative trajectory: Will Allie go to 
the demonstration? Will she fight toxic waste dumping? Will the issues be more 
fully examined? Will  the  show take a  political stand? But, like One Day  at  a 
Time, the topical social problem that serves as a hook or lure of "relevancy" is 
rerouted once it is introduced. Allie's initial position of opposition to toxic waste 
dumping is renegotiated as she expresses uncertainty because she has never been 
1 2  Cinema  Journal  29,  No.  1,  Fall  1989 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

to a demonstration--"not  even in the Sixties." Saying in a close-up, "I was the 
only  one  in  my  class that thought SDS was a  chain of  florists," Allie becomes 
realigned  with  a  pre-political position giving  new  narrative emphasis to  her 
psychological uncertainty. 

Such signifiers as "SDS" and "the Sixties" draw upon the target audience's 
extra-textual associations of  1960s college  protests. Denoting  opposition while 
connoting a present day nostalgia (what we might label "The Big Chill" effect), 
the  words are reinjected throughout the  next scene at Kate's and Allie's home 
where they are realigned with remembrances of lost youth. As the two women 
and their children joke among themselves and clear the supper dishes from the 
table,  Allie  describes the  events  of  the  previous scene.  Spurred on  by  Kate's 
questions, the familial scene narrows to an exclusive visual and verbal dialogue 
between Kate and Allie. But when Kate says, "That reminds me of when I was 
in college," a wide  establishing shot reintroduces the group. 

The  timed  reintroduction of  the  "nostalgia theme" with  the  family starts 
another round of group discussion on the subject of nostalgia itself. Representing 
her  past as  the  former campus radical, Kate assumes both  the  site  of  liberal 
opposition and of nostalgia for a romantic Sixties adolescence: "We were intense. 
We were committed. We believed in making love, not war." As the scene climaxes, 
Kate convinces Allie to go with her to the demonstration. Kate's dominant position 
as a symbolic male authority in the household is further reinforced when  Allie 
asks Kate to explain to the kids why they, too, cannot go to the demonstration. 
Kate gets both the last close-up and punch line. The scene not only narratively 
and subjectively reorganizes Kate and Allie in relationship to each other, but the 
social terms of  the first scene become  rhetorically realigned as purely personal 
terms in the second scene. 

It might be worthwhile here to note the structural echoes to the episode of 
One Day at a  Time discussed above. Both opening scenes articulate a series of 
social  and  personal questions that  quickly become  repositioned as  individual 
decisions among the  female  subjects: How  will  they  cope? The  second scenes 
repeat the  information presented in the openings and authorize a second indi- 
vidual in relationship to the female subject initially introduced. For Ann Romano, 
both David and Schneider assume that role. For Allie, it is Kate. 

Such discursive movement from problems of social to individual fulfillment 
repeats at the  protest itself in  the  third scene.  Kate first associates the  present 
sit-in with past political activism in the  1960s but then turns the protest into a 
friendly  trivia  game  of  Sixties song  titles.  When  Kate's and  Allie's arrest is 
overturned because Kate makes a date with a handsome cop, the narrative has 
completely abdicated Allie's initial political questions in  favor of new  ones in- 
tertwining Kate's nostalgia for her romantic youth with  her current desire for 
youthful romance. If  anything, the  narrative chain  thematically suggests that 
political protests are a good place for women to meet eligible bachelor policemen. 

The  "All-Purpose  Sex  Episode":  Take  Two.  There is  a  single  episode  of 
Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989  13 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Kate  & Allie,  however, that better illustrates both the  ideological continuities 
and shifts of the single-mother sitcom since One Day at a Time. Initially broadcast 
twice  during the  1986-87  season, the  episode adopts as its  narrative problem 
Jenny's (Allie's daughter) dilemma considering whether or not to have sex with 
her boyfriend. The ways in which Kate & Allie responds to the same narrative 
impulse earlier articulated in One Day at a Time suggest not only the durability 
of mother-daughter conflicts and the possibilities of television recycling but more 
importantly, significant recasting among social, industrial, and economic imper- 
atives. However timeless teenage sex may appear as a topical issue for "female" 
sitcom concerns, Kate & Allie  repositions the  problem. Initially introduced as 
Jenny's "problem," the question of whether or not she should have sex with her 
boyfriend is posed not to her mother but to Kate's daughter Emma in the girls' 
bedroom. In their private space, they mirror their mothers' relationship thereby 
opening up their positions as important subject sites for spectator identification. 
Their brief scene  establishes that Jenny will  not tell  her mother and will 
accede  to  her  boyfriend's desires. Jenny and  her  boyfriend are  subsequently 
shown  in  an  extended  scene,  whose  suspense revolves around the  narrative 
question initially posed: Will Jenny have sex with  her boyfriend? Their awk- 
wardness and  her  marked physical expressions of  uncertainty culminate in  a 
ritual enactment of opening and lying down on a hide-a-bed. The posed question 
is answered not through Jenny's motivation and resolution but by  the  sudden, 
unexpected arrival of the boyfriend's mother. Jenny leaves, and the scene ends 
with the boy's mother calling Allie on the telephone. 

The scene, however, is almost inversely positioned to the daughter-boyfriend 
scene in One Day at a  Time. Julie's encounter was the outcome of her mother's 
involvement and David's potential solution, and it was motivated as Ann's prob- 
lem, David's problem, and even Julie's problem. Jenny's encounter is the result 
only of Jenny's ambivalence about her sexual desires and Emma's awe. It further 
serves as  the  dramatic motivation for  her  mother's discovery, and  effectively 
causes new attention to  "what will Allie do?" thus relieving the narrative from 
the  burden of  actually answering the  first question. Since Allie's ignorance of 
the events is twice made an issue by Jenny and Emma, it encourages the spectator's 
omniscient relationship to  Allie.  It  promotes the  suspense and  expectation of 
"what will Allie do?" and renegotiates her maternal dilemma in relationship to 
the spectator's empathy. 

While a flurry of episodes broadcast early in the 1986-87 season restructured 
dominant relationships around Jenny and Emma, these production decisions may 
have been motivated more by concern over Susan St. James's advanced stage of 
pregnancy than by  a  deliberate shift to  the  teenagers as the  show's dominant 
characters. All the episodes shot while St. James was visibly pregnant block the 
visual representation of that fact. If several episodes maintain Kate's and Allie's 
centrality by  keeping  Kate behind  objects or immobile in  a  hospital bed,  the 
spatial, iconographic, and narrative limitations of such self-imposed restrictions 
may have necessitated shifting dramatic attention to the younger set of females. 
14  Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

It becomes interesting then  to  note  what could not be  articulated in  a  single- 
mother sitcom in the late 1980s-the  conception, pregnancy, and birth of a child 
to an unwed, white, affluent woman. The well-publicized announcements of St. 
James's (the actress') pregnancy provide an extra-textual discourse that may make 
Kate's physically limited appearances in fashionably oversized shirts the site for 
"the repressed" of a significant feminist issue. Kate & Allie's dominant discourse, 
however, displaces such potentially disruptive possibilities of female sexual and 
reproductive autonomy onto the more containable "issue" of teenage sex. 

Like One Day at  a  Time, the daughter's dilemma eventually becomes the 
mother's. Once Allie learns of Jenny's problem, she, too, expresses concern pri- 
marily over how she will handle the situation. But unlike Ann Romano's blank 
stares at the audience suggesting her benumbed state, Allie overdramatizes the 
fear of her inabilities. In another parody of stereotypically feminine inadequacy, 
Allie's voice  rises; her  gestures get  wilder. Like  Ann, she,  too,  reiterates her 
tentativeness to  someone else-to  Kate. Calling Kate on  the  telephone,  Allie 
receives-through  a  series of  intercut close-ups-not  a  surrogate parent like 
David  who  assumes control but one  who  directs her to take control. Although 
the production's self-imposed limitations may have prevented the characteristic 
two-shot in shared space, Kate's reassurances allow the scene's resolution around 
their  visually joined flow of  dialogue. They  further motivate the  next  scene's 
frank mother-daughter discussion of sexual ethics and birth control. 

The  episode's climax appears to  resolve what was posed but  remained a 
structuring absence more than ten years earlier in One Day at a Time-a  mother- 
daughter dialogue about a  teenager's sexual freedom and responsibilities. One 
Day at a  Time's 1976 maternal indecision could only be reconciled and relieved 
by Julie's unmotivated decision to remain a virgin. In Kate & Allie, the reverse 
occurs, and Jenny's indecision over whether she should remain a virgin can only 
be  reconciled and  relieved  (but not  resolved) by  Allie's maternal conciliation. 
The  social tensions dramatically encoded have shifted from adult women's un- 
certainty over how to cope with rebellious teenagers (whose rebellion is clearly 
a  reaction  to  mother-daughter bonds)  to  how  adult  women  should  serve  as 
responsible models for teenage daughters' socially acceptable initiation into sex. 
Industrial restrictions may have loosened to the degree that such a conver- 
sation could  end  with  Allie  uttering the  word  "gynecologist" as  part of  her 
concern that Jenny obtain birth control, but loosening restrictions and the con- 
versation itself must be  seen  in  relationship to both changing cultural and in- 
dustrial tensions. Kate & Allie's teenage  sex story comes on the  heels of  well- 
publicized episodes on other sitcoms like Valerie and Growing Pains and at least 
one made-for-television movie  (Daddy). In all these formats, teenagers grapple 
not only with the choice of sexual activity itself but with the importance of "safe 
sex"  and  contraception. Such  repeated  address regarding teenage  sexual en- 
counters seems less motivated by concern over reproduction-the  teenage birth 
rate has been  alarmingly high  since  1976-than  by  the  current fear over the 
AIDS epidemic.  Social mores may be  in  the  process of  redefinition as teenage 
Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989  15 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

sex itself is feared less than the spread of AIDS. For example, the only commercial 
"spots" after Jenny's scene with her boyfriend (broadcast in March 1987) were 
a Cagney and Lacey promo and an AIDS information message of simple black 
and white block letters filling the entire screen: "AIDS doesn't discriminate." 
What is  implicit  in  all  of  these shows is  the  way  that one  can  meet  the 
challenge of  the  AIDS epidemic  through the  individual purchase of  condoms. 
Broadcasters have not only targeted a  "safe sex" campaign in news and fiction 
programming that addresses how capitalism can meet the crisis, but they have 
also  lifted  industrial bans  against advertising condoms on  television.  In  this 
context, sexually active teenagers also assume a  newly  important demographic 
identity that television executives need  to define, measure, and deliver if  they 
hope to attract such potential advertisers. 

How the individual spectator will decode any specific instance of multiplicity, 
resistance, or  at  least  contradiction depends  as  much  on  the  spectator's own 
reference system and her/his interaction with a specific text, as on the institutional 
discourse that promotes feminism as self-fulfillment through the  terms of indi- 
vidual  decision-making and  self-improvement. Because One  Day  at  a  Time 
articulated a "modern woman" as a female subject, albeit within traditional terms 
of representation, it was deemed progressive in light of that decade's intertextual 
and extra-textual referrents. In the 1980s, Kate & Allie introduced greater textual 
complexity and problematics for a revised, more progressive evolution of fem- 
inism. By  responding to  changing social practices while  simultaneously trans- 
forming social practice into personal or individual terms, Kate & Allie may be 
understood both as a contemporary liberal text and as a means to both recognize 
and diffuse the threat of radical feminism. 

Any single reading of an episodic narrative must also be open-ended enough 
to include the televisual framework that activates any text with interjected com- 
mercial advertisements, promotion for other fictional programming, and news 
announcements, as  well  as  simultaneous kinds of  material on  other channels. 
However  "open" the  text may become as a  result of  possible combinations of 
program material, the  interrelationships between  fictional segments and com- 
mercial advertisements are not themselves infinite. They are bound by the in- 
stitution's modes and conventions; the  means by  which ideology is structured. 
A televisual discourse of "passive feminism" answers its own characters' "lack" 
with commercials that purposefully situate in consumer goods the kind of personal 
and maternal fulfillment that the fiction's subjects seek. Such a structural rela- 
tionship between  television discourse and  the  domination of  commodities has 
been  noted  by  television critics.33 Whether couching  their argument in  Cho- 
dorow's psychoanalytic theories regarding the loss of authority and the family, 
or  in  postmodern cultural definitions of  alienated  Otherness and  "feminine" 
identification, these  critics uniformly point  to  commodification as  the  central 
cultural means for filling the gap of "lost" authority.34 

Thus, the very sitcoms that propose liberal (or at least reformist) values still 
have an anti-radical and recuperative function. As Smythe has said: "If people 

1 6  Cinema Journal 29,  No. 1, Fall 1989 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

are  spending  their  time  catering  to  their  individual  interests  and  sensitivities, 
they  cannot  be  using  the  same  time  also  to  overthrow  capitalist  influence  and 
to  build  socialism."3  The  feminist  television  spectator  still  remains  a  prisoner  in 
the  subject  and  object  of  television's  efforts  to  capture  her 
her  own  home-both 
as  one  of  its  ultimate  trophies. 

Notes 
My  thanks to  Robert Deming,  Greg  Easley, and  E.  Ann  Kaplan for  their  insightful 
comments and criticism on an earlier version of this article, presented originally at the 
1986 International Television Studies Conference, London, England. My gratitude also 
for the support of University House, University of Iowa. 

1.  See, for example, Tim Brooks and Earle Marsh, The Complete  Directory to Prime 
Time Network TV Shows (New  York: Ballantine Books, 1981), 475; Les Brown, Les 
Brown's Encyclopedia  of  Television  (New  York: New  York Zoetrope, 1982), 282; 
Rick Mitz, The Great TV Sitcom Book (New  York: Perigee Books, 1983), 261. 

2.  Mitz, The Great TV Sitcom  Book, 383  and 365. 
3.  See,  for  example,  Bette-Jane Raphael, "Whatever Happened  to  Mary Richards?" 
McCalls  104  (September 1977): 20-22;  Jane Trahey, "Down  the  Tube," Working 
Woman 4,  no.  10 (October 1979): 30; Mary Cantwell, "Kate & Allie  & Cagney  & 
Lacey  & Krystle & Alexis  & Me," Vogue 175,  no.  2  (February 1985): 334; Susan 
Horowitz, "Life with  'Kate & Allie': The Not-So-Odd Couple on TV," Ms.  13, no. 
3  (September 1984): 32-33;  "Progress in Prime Time: TV Says Bye-Bye to Bimbos," 
Glamour 84  (July 1986): 40  (no author listed). 

4.  Serafina Bathrick, "The Mary Tyler Moore Show: Women at Home  and at Work," 
in MTM: 'Quality Television,' ed. Jane Feuer, Paul Kerr, and Tise Vahimagi (London: 
British Film  Institute, 1984), 99-131. 

5.  Robert  Deming,  "Kate  and  Allie:  'New  Women'  and  the  Audience's Television 

Archive," Camera Obscura, no.  16 (1988): 160. 

6.  Bathrick, "The Mary Tyler Moore Show," 101-102. 
7.  Valerie Harper, "What  'Rhoda' Taught Me  About  Marriage & Divorce," Ladies 

Home Journal 94  (September 1977): 36  and 44. 

8.  Kathleen Fury, "Are Kate and Allie Such Good Friends Off-Screen?" TV Guide (26 
April 1986): 26-30;  Horowitz; L. Lague, "Real Women Make a Comeback Thanks 
to  Susan Saint James and Jane Curtin in Kate  & Allie," People  Weekly 21  (7 May 
1984): 154-55. 

9.  Fury, "Are Kate and Allie," 26-30. 
10.  Laurie Jane Schulze, "Getting  Physical: Text/Context/Reading  and the  Made-for- 

Television Movie," Cinema Journal 25, no. 2  (Winter 1986): 35-50. 

11.  Hall  and  Morley see  televisual communication as a  complex process of  connected 
practices in  which  meaning and consumption are not only  interdependent but de- 
termined through enactments of encoding and decoding. In "Encoding/Decoding" 
(in Culture, Media, Language, ed. Stuart Hall, Dorothy Hobson, Andrew Lowe, and 
Paul Willis [London: Hutchinson & Co.,  1980], 128-38),  Hall defines the televisual 
process as a  continuous circuit of  "production, distribution, production" sustained 
through a passage of forms. Since Hall's initial discussions in  1973 and 1974, he has 
called for a more "pluricentered and multidimensional" subject whereby the decoding 
process itself includes gaps, breaks, and contradictory positions ("Signification, Rep- 
resentation, Ideology: Althusser and the Post-Structuralist Debates," Critical Studies 
in  Mass  Communication  2,  no.  2  [1985]: 91-114).  Positing increasingly elaborate 
theoretical responses to new questions and to the limitations of his earlier reflections, 
Cinema  Journal  29,  No.  1,  Fall  1989  17 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Hall  continues  to  theorize  the  text's ideological  structuration. This  is  a  complex 
process marked by contradictions and struggles as well as by the text's placement in 
concrete historical moments. 

12.  E.  Ann  Kaplan, "Feminist Criticism and  Television," in  Channels  of  Discourse: 
Television and Contemporary Criticism, ed. Robert C. Allen (Chapel Hill: University 
of North Carolina Press, 1987), 215-18. 

13.  Lynn  Joyrich, "All  That  Television Allows: TV  Melodrama, Postmodernism and 

Consumer Culture," Camera Obscura, no.  16 (1988): 130-31. 

14.  David  Marc, Demographic  Vistas: Television in  American  Culture (Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1984), 11. Marc is only one of a number of television 
critics who forward such a definition of situation comedy. 

15.  Robert Deming,  "'Kate  & Allie': 'New'  Women and the Audience's Televisual Ar- 

chives," unpublished draft of article cited above, 7-8. 

16.  See Annette Kuhn, Women's Pictures: Feminism  and  the  Cinema  (London: Rout- 
ledge and Kegan Paul, 1982), 131-40, for a discussion of the discourses of Hollywood's 
new  women's films, including An  Unmarried Woman. 

17.  Dallas  W.  Smythe,  "Communications: Blindspot of  Western Marxism," Canadian 

Journal of Political  and  Social  Theory 1, no. 3  (Fall 1977): 1-27. 

18.  See Todd Gitlin, Inside  Prime  Time  (New  York: Pantheon Books, 1985), 203-20. 
19.  Ibid. 
20.  Deming,  "Kate and Allie," 156-57. 
21.  "Progress in  Prime Time: TV  Says Bye-Bye to  Bimbos," Glamour 84  (July 1986): 

40. 

22.  Neil Gitlin refers to the ubiquitousness of such television programming by the middle 

1970s as "the turn toward relevance." 

23.  Harry Castleman and Walter J. Podrazik, Watching TV: Four Decades of American 

Television (New  York: McGraw-Hill Paperbacks, 1982), 254. 
24.  "Progress in Prime Time: TV Says Bye-Bye to  Bimbos," 40. 
25.  See Deming,  "Kate and Allie," 159, for a discussion of strong women characters in 
sitcoms of the 1950s and 1960s and how "their strength was figured in stories organized 
around patriarchal and/or  domestic norms." In addition, Marc offers extended dis- 
cussions of generic conventions in the  1950s and 1960s. 

In the genre's formulas popular in the  1960s, however, the single-parent fami- 
to define the nu- 
lies-whether  constructed around a father or mother-continued 
clear family in terms of two "parental" adults, one of whom fulfilled the domestic- 
nurturant role and the other who maintained economic proprietorship over the family. 
Character relationships occurred exclusively within  the  domestic realm (Bachelor 
Father, Family  Affair, My  Three Sons,  The  Ghost  and  Mrs. Muir) or  alternated 
familial and professional crisis relationships among domestic and work spaces (The 
Andy Griffith Show, The Courtship of Eddie's Father, Here's Lucy, The Lucy Show). 
26.  For purposes of  analysis, I  am  using the  opening credit sequence from the  show's 

first season. 

27.  Nancy  Chodorow, The Reproduction of  Mothering: Psychoanalysis  and  the  Soci- 

ology  of  Gender (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978), 138. 

28.  Ibid. 
29.  Jane Feuer, "Melodrama, Serial Form and Television Today," Screen 25, no. 1 (Jan- 

uary-February 1984): 16. 

30.  Bill Persky, quoted in Susan Horowitz, "Life with 'Kate and Allie,'"  33. 
31.  Late  in  the  1986-87  television season, Kate and  Allie  together started a  catering 
service  that they  maintained throughout the  last  1987-88  season. In  this new  ar- 
rangement,  Allie  provided  the  dominant  labor for  food  preparation while  Kate's 
primary responsibilities were acquiring clients, commissions, and handling financial 

18  Cinema  Journal  29,  No.  1,  Fall  1989 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

arrangements. Despite  narrative evolutions of  the  characters, they  maintained the 
central duality previously established. 

32.  When, in the  1988-89  season, Allie remarried, even her honeymoon was configured 
in relationship to her dialogue with Kate. Interspersed throughout the 12 December 
1988 episode were split-screen telephone conversations between the two women. In 
subsequent episodes, Kate moved  in  with Allie and her new  husband so as to  keep 
the women's friendship the structural center of the show. 

33.  For  a  general  discussion on  the  issues of  TV  intertextuality between  fiction and 
advertisement, see Mimi White, "Crossing Wavelengths: The Diegetic and Referential 
Imaginary of American Commercial Television," Cinema Journal 25, no. 2 (Winter 
1986): 51-64;  for a more specific interaction, see Sandy Flitterman, "The Real Soap 
Operas: TV Commercials," in Regarding Television, ed. E. Ann Kaplan (Frederick, 
Maryland: University Publications of America, 1983), 84-96. 

34.  For particularly well-drawn arguments from each  perspective, see  George Lipsitz, 
"The Meaning of Memory: Family, Class and Ethnicity in Early Network Television 
Programs," Camera Obscura, no. 16 (1988): 79-118; and Joyrich, "All That Television 
Allows," 129-53. 

35.  Smythe, "Communications," 7. 

Cinema  Journal  29,  No.  1,  Fall  1989  1  9 

This content downloaded from 131.173.16.20 on Fri, 2 Aug 2013 07:53:39 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

