Environment and Planning A 2011, volume 43, pages 988 ^ 997

doi:10.1068/a43505

Guest editorial

Commodity chains and the uneven geographies of global capitalism: a disarticulations
perspective
Over the course of the last decade, the commodity chain construct has informed
many studies of international trade and production networks in sociology, geography,
history, and, more recently, anthropology. The interdisciplinary appeal of the chain
heuristic lies in its ability to ground abstract-prone analysis of economic globalization
in the everyday practices of firms, workers, households, states, and consumers. The
commodity chain concept was developed by Terence Hopkins and Immanuel
Wallerstein in the late 1970s to differentiate their understanding of capitalism’s territo-
rial scope from methodologically nationalist approaches to economic change. Instead of
understanding economic development as a sequential process whereby national markets
evolve in the direction of expanded foreign trade, the authors suggested

‘‘[starting] with a radically different presumption. Let us conceive of something
we shall call, for want of a better conventional term, ‘commodity chains.’ What we
mean by such chains is the following: take an ultimate consumable item and trace
back the set of inputs that culminated in this item, including prior transformations,
the raw materials, the transportation mechanisms, the labor input into each of the
material processes, the food inputs into the labor. This linked set of processes we
call a commodity chain. If the ultimate consumable were, say, clothing, the chain
would include the manufacture of the cloth, the yarn, etc, the cultivation of the
cotton, as well as the reproduction of the labor forces involved in these productive
activities’’ (1977, page 128).

For Hopkins and Wallerstein a final commodity is the outcome of linked processes
connecting actors and activities across space; by studying the processes constituting a
particular commodity chain, it is possible to get analytical purchase on the complex
and concrete determinations of the global economy.

World-systems theorists mobilized the chain construct to reveal the emergence of
an international division of labor incorporating core and peripheral countries alike
into a global capitalist economy. Later iterations, including Gereffi’s global commodity
chains (GCC) framework (Gereffi and Korzeniewicz, 1994) and the global value chains
(GVC) approach (Gereffi et al, 2005; Gibbon and Ponte, 2005), have shifted from
the long-range, macrohistorical perspective of world-systems theory to a more
industry-centred and firm-centered model of organizational analysis.(1)

In reaction to this recent turn, several scholars sympathetic to the overall thrust of
the commodity chain project have called for the need to ‘embed’, ‘territorialize’, or
‘spatialize’ studies of transnational commodity production (Bair, 2005; Dicken et al,
2001; Dussel Peters, 2008). As evident from these disparate terms, these critiques do
not represent a coherent theoretical agenda; rather they indicate a shared skepticism
about the influence of microsocial network analysis and transaction cost economics on
the study of commodity cum value chains (see Bair, 2005).

Just as the original commodity chain framework burst disciplinary bounds, so too
has the ambit of its critique. Economic geographers argue that the empirical focus on

(1) While the GCC and later GVC approaches share an interest in the chain as an analytic for
comprehending the connections between various kinds of economic activities, there are important
differences between them which have been discussed elsewhere (Bair, 2005; Gibbon and Ponte, 2005).

Guest editorial

989

firms as mesolevel actors, although yielding valuable insights into the governance
dynamics internal to production networks, has translated into a flattening of power
relations and an even further relegation of space to the empirical background
(Dicken and Malmberg, 2001). Feminist scholars argue that the chain heuristic freezes
complex and relational circuits of economic activity into a fixed territorial framework
where consumption is presumed to be located in the ‘core’, while production takes
place in the ‘periphery’ (Leslie and Reimer, 1999; Ramamurthy, 2004). Furthermore,
both world-systems theory and commodity chain analysis largely externalize social
difference when tracing macrodivisions of labor, giving short shrift to the gendered
and racialized forms of labor central to the shifting geographies of commodity produc-
tion (Ferna¤ ndez-Kelly, 1983; Mullings, 2004; Ramamurthy, 2004; Werner, 2010). In
addition to the specific insights described above, what we take from these critical
engagements with the commodity chains framework is its generative if largely unreal-
ized potential for interdisciplinary theorizing of the on-going processes by which global
networks of production, trade, and consumption are continually given expression in
concrete historical and geographical relations (see Peck, 2005).

Our own collaboration has been nursed by this potential and by our respective
experiences researching the volatile trajectories and shifting geographies of garment
and textile production over the past decade. The work that we have done on the
changing configuration of the apparel commodity chain led us to the conclusion
that the commodity chains literature evidences a general and systematic bias: specifi-
cally, the extant literature is characterized by a theoretical and empirical emphasis on
incorporation. This is manifest in the tendency of researchers to pursue the newest
production frontier of a particular commodity in order to analyze how a region
becomes linked into a chain and how this incorporation impacts local actors. We
became increasingly aware that the commodity chains approach tends to downplay, if
not ignore, the fact that changing geographies of global production reflect moments of
inclusion and exclusion. The latter refer to those processes by which regions and actors
become disconnected or expulsed from commodity chains that may be incorporating
new regions and actors elsewhere. Production volatility, precipitous booms and busts,
and historical patterns of dis/investment and dispossession are effaced by the litera-
ture’s ‘inclusionary bias’ towards expanding production frontiers. How would our
understanding of commodity chains, networks, and,
indeed, the ‘global economy’
be different if analytical attention focused upon the layered histories and uneven
geographies of capitalist expansion, disinvestment, and devaluation?

The theme issue that we have the pleasure to introduce here is the result of both
our own efforts to respond to this question and those of talented scholars from the
diverse disciplinary locations of sociology, geography, and feminist studies. In our role
as conveners of this conversation and guest editors, we frame these contributions
under the concept of ‘disarticulations’: in the broadest sense, an approach to commod-
ity production through the lens of the reproduction of uneven geographies. In this
introduction we draw out the theoretical lineages of disarticulation and briefly sum-
marize the contents of the theme issue. In the five papers that follow our introduction,
the concept of disarticulations is taken up through empirically rich, theoretically
informed, and grounded studies. The collection affords a processual understanding of
commodity chains as expressions of an ongoing and continuous interaction between
the production of goods, places, and subjects and their iterative incorporation and
expulsion from primary circuits of capital accumulation. Taken together, these studies
demonstrate how connections across space and time are forged through processes of
disjuncture and disruption that selectively transform, or disarticulate, existing social
relations and forms of production.

