FIVE

Solidifying affect: Structures of feeling, 

habitus and emotional capital

We are talking about characteristic elements of impulse, restraint and 
tone; specifically affective elements of consciousness and relationships: 
not feeling against thought, but thought as felt and feeling as thought: 
practical consciousness of a present kind, in a living and interrelating 
continuity. We are then defining these elements as a ‘structure’: as a set, 
with specific internal relations, at once interlocking and in tension. Yet 
we are also defining a social experience which is still in process, often 
indeed not yet recognized as social but taken to be private, idiosyncratic, 
and  even  isolating,  but  which  in  analysis  (though  rarely  otherwise) 
has its emergent, connecting, and dominant characteristics, indeed its 
specific hierarchies. These are more often recognizable at a later stage, 
when they have been (as often happens) formalized, classified, and in 
many cases built into institutions and formations. By that time the case 
is different; a new structure of feeling will usually already have begun 
to form, in the true social present. (Raymond Williams, 1977, p. 132)

… personality has to be seen as social practice and not as an entity 
distinct  from  ‘society’.  Personality  is  what  people  do,  just  as  social 
relations  are  what  people  do,  and  the  doings  are  the  same.  (Robert 
Connell, 1987, p. 220)

In the previous chapter I looked at affective practice as a lively, situated communi-
cative act. I was trying to elucidate the performative patterns in affective episodes 
and  their  moment-by-moment  organisation.  The  multimodal  flows  involved 
in  Lori’s  road  rage  studied  by  Jack  Katz  (1999)  were  a  good  illustration,  as  she 
screwed up her face, wagged her finger, and then stifled her display, afraid of the 
consequences. I noted the kinds of social and material configurations that make 
affective moments like these possible, but my main concern was with the here-
and-now of affective action and affective–discursive meaning-making. 

In  this  chapter  I  want  to  pay  more  attention  to  persistence,  repetition  and 
power, and the continuities threading through these kinds of situated moments. 

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   102

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

This chapter and the next are paired. In this one I am concerned with how affec-
tive practices sediment in social formations. How, for example, do characteristic 
distributions  or  profiles  of  affective  practices  arise  which  distinguish  members 
of dominant social classes, reinforcing their privilege? How do workplaces, insti-
tutions  or  historical  periods  acquire  distinctive  affective  flavours?  In  the  next 
chapter, I will be concerned with questions about the sedimentation of affective 
practices  in  individual  lives.  How  does  a  personal  affective  order  emerge  over 
time, and the potentially large colour-wheel of affectivity reduce down to com-
pose individually distinctive repertoires? 

As Connell notes above, these two sets of questions about social formations and 
personal histories reflect different standpoints on the same psychosocial matter. 
They are inseparably linked. One angle produces social history, the other social 
psychology. This typically doubled relation between personal affective habits and 
affective social conventions – between personal history and social history – can be 
seen in the ruminations below from the crime novelist P.D. James. At the age of 
89, James was reflecting back on her own emotional preferences in an interview 
conducted by journalist Penny Wark:

‘One faces things by oneself and there they are. You deal with it’, she says, 
baffled by the 21st-century taste for sharing pain and eschewing privacy. ‘I feel 
that I have a responsibility to the dead, for what my husband might not want 
to be told. I don’t think that I should make money by writing details of private 
pain or private difficulties which my children will find hurtful’ …. ‘We now 
have a world in which people write their diaries on Facebook for millions of 
other people. To me that is incomprehensible. There is something rather sad 
about children who may not be making relationships at school getting home 
and blogging. When a child is run over you see all these toys and flowers pil-
ing up, then they have counsellors to deal with their grief and you see them 
all hugging each other and crying on each other’s shoulders.’

She remembers a day during the war when a recently married colleague heard 
that her husband had been killed. James said she was sorry and suggested to 
her supervisor that the girl might like to go home. ‘She said, “No, she’s got a 
job to do. She won’t want to do that.” I felt if she went home she’d have her 
mother or somebody to comfort her and I still think she should have been 
allowed to go home, but I don’t think that woman was callous. I think that 
she thought that’s what she wanted, to get on with the job.

‘But the idea that we’d all go up to her and hug her – I do find it a bit creepy. 
I like emotional reticence. I accept that for many people who have appalling 
experiences psychologically they are probably better if there is someone they 
can  share  them  with,  but  I  can’t  imagine  myself  getting  any  comfort  from 
being counselled.’ (Wark, 2009, pp. 4–5)

James is recalling here an affective life rather different from the affective life of 
many contemporary middle-class British citizens. As Ian Craib notes, ‘there are 
fashions in emotions and … people come to talk about the fashionable ones’ 
(1994, p. 90). What ‘feels right’ at the time turns out to be historically quite 
specific.

 

SOLIDIFYING AFFECT 

103

05-Wetherell-4313-Ch-05.indd   103

30/11/2011   10:01:44 AM

