Journal of European Public Policy, 2014
Vol. 21, No. 10, 1541 –1554, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2014.941534

The voter says no, but nobody listens:
causes and consequences of the
Eurosceptic vote in the 2014
European elections
Oliver Treib

ABSTRACT The 2014 European Parliament elections saw an unprecedented
surge of support for Eurosceptic parties. This article provides an overview of the
ideologically highly diverse Eurosceptic camp in the European Parliament and
addresses the causes and consequences of the Eurosceptic vote. Based on an analysis
of aggregate election results and opinion-poll data, it argues that the electoral success
of Eurosceptic parties cannot be dismissed as a mere protest vote against unpopular
governments. Instead, fundamental worries about the effects of European Union
(EU) policies and dissatisfaction with mainstream politics lie at the heart of the Euro-
sceptic success. The selection of Jean-Claude Juncker as President of the Commis-
sion, backed by overwhelming majorities in the European Council and the
European Parliament, suggests that Eurosceptics, despite their considerable electoral
support, will continue to be excluded from the EU’s corridors of power. This strategy
of exclusion provides the ideal breeding ground for an even stronger Eurosceptic
backlash in ﬁve years’ time.

KEY WORDS Anti-establishment politics; EU issue voting; European Parliament
elections; Euroscepticism; populism; second-order elections.

INTRODUCTION

When the polling stations closed in the evening of 25 May 2014, a European
Parliament (EP) election that was in many ways unprecedented had come to
an end. It was the largest election for the European Parliament that has ever
been held in Europe. More than 12,000 candidates from almost 450 parties
and lists competed for the 751 seats in the European Parliament, and about
400 million voters from 28 member states were called upon to choose their
respective national delegates to the European Parliament.1

For the ﬁrst time since 1979, when direct elections for the European Parlia-
ment were introduced, the major European party federations made an effort to
tie the election to the decision on who should be the next President of the
European Commission. They drew up lead candidates who were considered
contenders for the position of Commission President. The idea underlying

# 2014 Taylor & Francis

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 1542

Journal of European Public Policy

the nomination of what soon came to be known by the German term Spitzen-
kandidaten was that the candidate whose European party group gained most
votes should become the next Commission President.

Those who had placed high hopes in the nomination of rivalling Spitzenkan-
didaten, expecting increased public interest in the elections, higher turnout
rates, and a transnational debate about the future of the European Union
(EU) (e.g., Beck 2014), were soon brought back down to earth, however.
Although several TV debates between the Spitzenkandidaten were held, public
interest in these debates and in the candidates themselves remained dismal.
Turnout levels did not increase either. Instead, electoral participation remained
at the record low levels of 2009, with only 43 per cent of eligible voters
bothering to cast their votes.

Finally, and most importantly, more voters than ever cast their votes for political
parties that advocated radical reforms of the EU, campaigned for an exit of their
countries from the EU, or even pushed for scrapping the whole project
of European integration altogether. Rather than jumping on the train of the Spit-
zenkandidaten, EU citizens voted a record number of candidates from Eurosceptic
parties into the European Parliament. This article addresses the causes and conse-
quences of this surge of support for Eurosceptic parties. It argues that the Euroscep-
tic vote cannot be dismissed as a mere protest vote against unpopular governments.
Instead, fundamental worries about the effects of EU policies and dissatisfaction
with mainstream politics lie at the heart of the Eurosceptic success. As it is
highly unlikely that these grievances will be taken into account by the overwhelm-
ing majorities of pro-integrationist parties that control the European Council, the
European Parliament and the European Commission, we are likely to see an even
stronger Eurosceptic, anti-establishment backlash in ﬁve years’ time.

The next section starts out with a descriptive account of the Eurosceptic
parties that have gained seats in the European Parliament. The article then
addresses the causes underlying the success of Eurosceptic parties. In a ﬁrst
step, it discusses to what extent the Eurosceptic vote was a sign of short-term
protest against unpopular domestic governments or an expression of discontent
with the institutional set-up and the policies of the EU. Second, it analyses the
extent to which the success of Eurosceptic parties can be seen as the upshot of a
more fundamental process of disaffection with the political programmes, leaders
and modes of decision-making of mainstream politics. The article concludes
with some thoughts on the implications of this analysis for the future direction
of EU politics and policy-making.

AN OVERVIEW OF THE 2014 EUROSCEPTIC VOTE

Eurosceptic parties won seats in the European Parliament in 23 out of 28
member states. The only countries whose EP delegations do not comprise Euro-
sceptic deputies are Estonia, Luxembourg, Malta, Romania and Slovenia.
Everywhere else, parties that at least voiced major concerns about the current
set-up of the European Union or some of its main policies made their way

Downloaded by [MPI Max-Planck-institute Fur Gesellschaftsforschung] at 05:14 20 March 2015 