Scaling

7

Sociological Methodology
2014, Vol. 44(1) 369–399
Ó American Sociological Association 2014
DOI: 10.1177/0081175013516114
http://sm.sagepub.com

THE EFFECT OF LABELING AND
NUMBERING OF RESPONSE SCALES
ON THE LIKELIHOOD OF RESPONSE
BIAS

Guy Moors*
Natalia D. Kieruj*
Jeroen K. Vermunt*

Abstract

Extreme response style (ERS) and acquiescence response style (ARS) are
among the most encountered problems in attitudinal research. The authors
investigate whether the response bias caused by these response styles varies
with following three aspects of question format: full versus end labeling,
numbering answer categories, and bipolar versus agreement response scales.
A questionnaire was distributed to a random sample of 5,351 respondents
from the Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social Sciences household
panel, of which a subsample was assigned to one of five conditions. The
authors apply a latent class factor model that allows for diagnosing and cor-
recting for ERS and ARS simultaneously. The results show clearly that both
response styles are present in the data set, but ARS is less pronounced than
ERS. With regard to format effects, the authors find that end labeling evokes
more ERS than full labeling and that bipolar scales evoke more ERS than

*Tilburg University, Tilburg, The Netherlands

Corresponding Author:
Guy Moors, Tilburg University, Department of Methodology and Statistics, PO Box 90153,
5000LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
Email: guy.moors@uvt.nl

Downloaded from 

smx.sagepub.com

 at ASA - American Sociological Association on September 5, 2014

370

Moors et al.

agreement style scales. With full labeling, ERS opposes opting for middle
response categories, whereas end labeling distinguishes ERS from all other
response categories. ARS did not significantly differ depending on test
conditions.

Keywords

acquiescence response style, extreme response style, latent class analysis, full
labeling, end labeling, measuring attitudes

1. INTRODUCTION

A survey researcher’s ultimate dream is to develop unbiased measure-
ments of opinions and attitudes. However, measurement error is hard to
avoid, and when measurement error is not random, it is of great concern
to any survey researcher. Response bias is a well-known source of non-
random error, and Likert-type rating scales have been shown to be
prone to all kinds of biases (Chan 1991; Greenleaf 1992; Kieruj and
Moors 2010; Smith 1967). In this paper, we focus on the question of
whether certain aspects of scale format—more specifically, the verbal
and numerical labeling of the answer categories—affect a respondent’s
likelihood of providing biased responses.

Response bias is defined as response style whenever a person
responds systematically to questionnaire items on some basis other than
what the items were specifically designed to measure (Paulhus 1991). In
this study, we focus on two commonly discussed response style behaviors
in attitude research: (1) extreme response style (ERS) and (2) acquies-
cence response style (ARS). ERS is the tendency to choose only the
extreme endpoints of the scale (Hurley 1998), and ARS is the tendency
to agree rather than disagree with items regardless of item content (Van
Herk, Poortinga, and Verhallen 2004). These response styles can be par-
ticularly problematic for comparative research; when left unevaluated,
cultural differences may be misinterpreted as substantive differences in
the construct being examined (Johnson et al. 2005). Developing scales
that are not affected or are much less affected by response styles thus
becomes important. Hui and Triandis (1989), for instance, found that cul-
tural variations in ERS use were apparent when 5-point scales were used,
but such variations vanished when 10-point scales were administered.

The process of constructing a rating scale is not as straightforward as
it may first appear. There are several choices a researcher must make

Downloaded from 

smx.sagepub.com

 at ASA - American Sociological Association on September 5, 2014

