HTRC05.qxd  12/05/2006  12:32PM  Page 138

How to Read a Poem

Dubourgh to him was but a fool;
He played melodious without rule,
And sung the feats of Fin McCool,

The giant . . .

The rhyme scheme in the poem is a kind of comic ritual in itself. Dunkin
uses  some  deliberately  inept  rhymes  (‘scurvy’/‘topsy-turvy’,  ‘from  it’/
‘vomit’, ‘dead aunt’/‘pedant’), but the real comic effect is reaped from the
way the ﬁrst three lines of each verse (which are iambic tetrameters) set up
a rhythm which is suddenly disrupted by the ﬁnal, lamely tacked-on phrase.
These ﬁnal phrases come after a slight pause, during which the reader just
has  time  to  wonder  what  monstrously  over-ingenious  rhyme  is  about  to 
be  perpetrated.  The  ﬁnal  phrase,  with  its  brief  trisyllabic  lilt,  is  inevitably
bathetic:

Each blithesome damsel shews her shape,
Enough to burst her stays and tape,
And bangs the boards: the ﬁddlers scrape
Their cat-guts:

Brave C–, foe to popish dogs,
In boots, as cumbersome as clogs,
Displays his parts, and B––jogs

His fat guts.

The  ﬁnal  phrases,  almost  afterthoughts,  are  too  laconic  to  bear  the  em-
phasis which the verse throws on them, and this itself is a comic effect. The
phrases are necessary to round off the sense of each stanza, yet rhythmically
speaking they seem like feebly superﬂuous gestures. Each stanza thus seems
to  end  on  an  embarrassing  anti-climax,  as  the  speaking  voice  trails  away. 
It is as though the sense needs these phrases but the metre does not, since
it  and  its  trim,  triple  rhyme  are  already  complete  in  themselves.  This  ten-
sion  between  feeling  that  the  phrases  are  internal  to  the  verses,  yet  also 
pointlessly external to them, is a kind of wit.

5.11

Imagery

Finally,  a  word  about  imagery.  Just  as  rhyme,  metre  and  texture  involve 
an  interplay  of  difference  and  identity,  so  do  most  images.  Similes  and

138

HTRC05.qxd  12/05/2006  12:32PM  Page 139

How to Read a Poem

metaphors insist on afﬁnities between elements which we also acknowledge
to be different; and the more we attend to the kinship between the terms,
the larger the differences may loom. Metonymy links elements in a contiguous
way  (bird/sky,  for  example),  thus  also  creating  an  equivalence  between
things which we recognise to be disparate. Synecdoche substitutes a part for
a whole (wing for bird, for example, or crown for monarch), and parts and
wholes are both different and allied.

The term ‘image’ is in some ways misleading, since it suggests the visual,
and not all imagery is of this kind. Auden, for example, is famous for images
which yoke together the concrete and the abstract: ‘Anxiety receives them
like a Grand Hotel’; ‘And lie apart like epochs from each other’. Part of the
point of similes like this, which belong to an era in which the whole idea of
representation is in crisis, is that they bafﬂe any attempt to visualise them.
But this is true in a sense of all such equating of one thing with another. We
speak  of  similes  and  metaphors  as  images;  but  both  of  them  are  forms  of
comparison, and it is hard to see how a comparison can be a picture.6 We
can describe jealousy as a green-eyed monster, but this tends to mean that
we picture a green-eyed monster rather than jealousy. You can take a photo-
graph of a goat, but not of lechery. You can hold the two parts of the com-
parison together in language, just as in language you can have a purple-coloured
pain, a grin without a cat, a square circle, a person who is both dead and
alive, or a cathedral which is built entirely out of stone but also entirely out
of jelly. But it is not easy to portray any of these phenomena visually. What
image does ‘My love is like a red, red rose’ bring to mind? A rose with well-
plucked  eyebrows  and  dainty  legs?  It  is  language’s  lack  of  visualisability
which confers such enviable freedom upon it. Seeing language as no more
than an image or representation of reality is a way of restricting its liberty.
In  literary  history,  the  words  for  such  policing  of  the  signiﬁer  are  realism 
and naturalism – movements which, despite their exclusiveness, have been
immensely fertile and productive.

It is true that there are kinds of imagery which do not involve visualisa-
tion. We speak, for example, of aural or tactile imagery. Yet the word remains
more  deceptive  than  illuminating.  For  some  eighteenth-century  critics,
imagery referred to the power of poetry to make us ‘see’ objects, to feel as
if we were in their actual presence; but this implied, oddly, that the function
of poetic language was to efface itself before what it represented. Language
makes things vividly present to us, but to do so adequately it must cease to
interpose its own ungainly bulk between us and them. So poetic language

6 A point made by P. N. Furbank in his Reﬂections on the Word ‘Image’ (London, 1970), p. 1.

139

