13498 • The Journal of Neuroscience, August 14, 2013 • 33(33):13498 –13504

Behavioral/Cognitive

The Flickering Wheel Illusion: When ␣Rhythms Make a
Static Wheel Flicker

Rodika Sokoliuk1,2 and Rufin VanRullen1,2
1Universite´ de Toulouse, Centre de Recherche Cerveau et Cognition, Universite´ Paul Sabatier, 31062 Toulouse, France, and 2CNRS, UMR 5549, Faculte´ de
Me´decine de Purpan, CHU Purpan, 31052 Toulouse Cedex, France

␣oscillations (8 –14 Hz) greatly influence brain activity, yet we generally do not experience them consciously: the world does not appear
to oscillate. Dedicated strategies must exist in the brain to prevent these oscillations from disrupting normal processing. Could suitable
stimuli fool these strategies and lead to the conscious experience of our own brain oscillations? We describe and explore a novel illusion
in which the center of a static wheel stimulus (with 30 – 40 spokes) is experienced as flickering when viewed in the visual periphery. The
key feature of this illusion is that the stimulus fluctuations are experienced as a regular and consistent flicker, which our human observers
estimated at ⬃9 Hz during a psychophysical matching task. Correspondingly, the occipital ␣rhythm of the EEG was the only oscillation
that showed a time course compatible with the reported illusion: when ␣amplitude was strong, the probability of reporting illusory
flicker increased. The peak oscillatory frequency for these flicker-induced modulations was significantly correlated, on a subject-by-
subject basis, with the individual ␣frequency measured during rest, in the absence of visual stimulation. Finally, although the effect is
strongest during eye movements, we showed that stimulus motion relative to the retina is not necessary to perceive the illusion: the flicker
can also be perceived on the afterimage of the wheel, yet by definition this afterimage is stationary on the retina. We conclude that this new
flickering illusion is a unique way to experience the ␣rhythms that constantly occur in the brain but normally remain unnoticed.

Introduction
Neuronal oscillations, such as the ␣rhythm (Berger, 1929) (8 –14
Hz), pervade the brain and influence sensory processing (Makeig
et al., 2002; Thut et al., 2006; Hanslmayr et al., 2007; van Dijk et
al., 2008). In particular, recent findings showed that visual process-
ing is more efficient at certain phases of the ongoing ␣rhythm than
others (Busch et al., 2009; Mathewson et al., 2009; Busch and Van-
Rullen, 2010; Dugue´ et al., 2011; Scheeringa et al., 2011). It is surpris-
ing to realize, therefore, that the sensory outcome itself is unaffected:
we do not perceive the world as oscillating. The brain must have
developed strategies to conceal the consequences of oscillations from
our perception. For instance, the brain could rely on one or more of
the following mechanisms: (1) conscious experience may arise from
brain regions far removed from those where ␣ is produced and
found to influence sensory processing; (2) attention, a major factor
in the selection of information for awareness, is known to decrease
the amplitude of ␣oscillations (Worden et al., 2000; Thut et al., 2006;
Klimesch et al., 2007), thereby dampening their potential perceptual
consequences; and (3) finally, one could envision that any recurring
“temporal gaps” in perception produced by the periodic pulses of ␣

Received Dec. 10, 2012; revised July 9, 2013; accepted July 14, 2013.

Author contributions: R.S. and R.V. designed research; R.S. performed research; R.S. and R.V. analyzed data; R.S.

and R.V. wrote the paper.

This work was supported by Agence Nationale de la Recherche Grant 06JCJC-0154 and a European Young Inves-

tigator Award to R.V.

The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Correspondence should be addressed to Rodika Sokoliuk, CERCO CNRS UMR 5549, Pavillon Baudot, CHU Purpan,

BP 25202, 31052 Toulouse Cedex, France. E-mail: sokoliuk@cerco.ups-tlse.fr.

DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5647-12.2013

Copyright © 2013 the authors

0270-6474/13/3313498-07$15.00/0

inhibition (Jensen and Mazaheri, 2010) could be actively “filled in”
using immediately preceding and/or following visual information to
even out our conscious perceptual experience (similarly to the
filling-in of the blind spot in early representations of visual space).
Regardless of which of these (or other) strategies is actually used by
the brain to conceal perceptual effects of ␣rhythms, it is tempting to
ask whether suitable stimuli could fool these strategies and lead to the
conscious experience of our own brain oscillations.

Here we report on a novel illusion in which the center of a sta-
tionary wheel made up of ⬃30–40 spokes appears to flicker vividly
and regularly (Fig. 1). The flicker occurs most strongly during small
eye movements performed with the stimulus in the periphery. How-
ever, we show that stimulus motion relative to the retina is not cru-
cial to perceive the illusory flicker: flicker can also be experienced on
the afterimage of the stimulus; yet by definition, this afterimage is
stationary on the retina. Using psychophysics, we demonstrate that
the illusory flicker frequency peaks within the ␣range (⬃9 Hz). To
address the neuronal basis of the illusion, we recorded EEG while
observers (N ⫽ 20) performed smooth pursuit eye movements, fol-
lowing with their gaze a slowly rotating dot around the stationary
wheel. The flicker illusion was maximal for specific eye positions
around the wheel. The only EEG frequency band that displayed a
compatible time course was the ␣rhythm (8–14 Hz) over occipital
electrodes: an increased ␣magnitude specifically coincided with
the occurrence of illusory flicker. Furthermore, the frequency
that was maximally modulated during illusory perception was
significantly correlated with the individual ␣ frequency on a
subject-by-subject basis. We conclude that this new flickering
illusion represents a unique way to consciously experience the
brain’s ongoing ␣rhythm.

Sokoliuk and VanRullen • ␣Rhythms Make a Static Wheel Flicker

J. Neurosci., August 14, 2013 • 33(33):13498 –13504 • 13499

Behavioral data analysis. Behavioral data were analyzed using a one-
way ANOVA for the matching task and a circular r test: Raleigh test for
circular uniformity; circular statistics toolbox from MATLAB (Berens,
2009) for the smooth pursuit task.

EEG data acquisition and analysis. EEG and EOG were recorded at
1024 Hz using a Biosemi system (64 active and 3 ocular electrodes) and
downsampled offline to 128 Hz for data analysis via the MATLAB tool-
box, eeglab (Delorme and Makeig, 2004). Individual electrode data were
visually inspected, and channel data containing artifacts were interpo-
lated by the mean of adjacent electrodes. Time-frequency transforma-
tions were generated over all channels using eeglab (Delorme and
Makeig, 2004) with a function akin to a wavelet transform, starting with
3 cycles at 2 Hz and increasing linearly to 37.5 cycles at 50 Hz. To deter-
mine which oscillatory bands contributed to changes in brain activity
during the perception of illusory flicker (smooth pursuit paradigm, illu-
sory condition), a Fourier transform was performed on the amplitude
envelope of the time-frequency transformed signals, separately for each
frequency (which were then grouped into standard EEG frequency
bands: ␦, ␪, ␣, ␤, ␥). The resulting Fourier spectral amplitude at the
frequency of revolution of the eyes around the wheel (0.067 Hz) was
normalized by the amplitudes at surrounding frequencies (from 0 to
0.133 Hz, excluding the eye revolution frequency itself), revealing for
each oscillatory band the amount of amplitude modulation by eye posi-
tion (and, thus, by illusory flicker). The same procedure was also applied
to EEG data of the control condition. To compare amplitude modula-
tions during illusory and control conditions, we used a two-tailed paired
t test (␣level ⫽ 0.05). The time course of the amplitude modulation for
illusory and control conditions was also analyzed for electrodes within a
specific ROI (see Fig. 3E, green). Trials were epoched, each epoch corre-
sponding to one revolution of the fixation dot around the wheel (i.e.,
15 s); these epochs were aligned so as to be centered on the eye position of
maximal flicker perception (averaged over all subjects).

To evaluate whether the frequency band modulated during illusory
perception was correlated to the individual ␣ rhythm, we first deter-
mined, for each subject, the peak modulation frequency of these time-
frequency representations (we applied a fast Fourier transform on the
time dimension and used the first frequency component as a measure of
illusory modulation, then extracted the peak frequency of the resulting
amplitude spectrum). Fourteen of 20 subjects provided a clear individual
peak frequency for these flicker-induced modulations (amplitude was
1.5 times as high as the amplitude at surrounding frequencies: 5–15 Hz).
To determine the individual ␣ frequency of each subject, we analyzed
EEG data recorded during rest (eyes opened, data recorded from elec-
trode Oz; epochs of variable duration from 3 to 60 s). Data were down-
sampled to 256 Hz, visually inspected for artifacts, and bandpass filtered
between 0.3 Hz and 30 Hz. Power spectra were computed using Welch’s
modified periodogram method in MATLAB (Welch, 1967); we extracted
the peak in the ␣frequency band (8 –14 Hz), retaining only peak ampli-
tudes that were at least 1.5 times as high as the average amplitude at
surrounding frequencies (5–15 Hz). Ten of the previously retained 14
subjects yielded an exploitable individual ␣peak frequency.

Eye tracker data acquisition and analysis. To precisely control eye
movements during the smooth pursuit task, we performed a control
experiment with a subgroup (N ⫽ 3) of our subjects where we simulta-
neously recorded EEG and eye movements using an eye tracker (IView
Hi-Speed eye tracker; SensoMotoric Instruments). Participants were
performing the same smooth pursuit task as explained above. Eye posi-
tion data were recorded at 1250 Hz and downsampled offline to 128 Hz
for data analysis. Data were then analyzed for artifacts and eye move-
ments that exceeded a fixed limit: all data points that reflected eye posi-
tions deviating ⬎3 degrees of visual angle from the fixation dot were
flagged for rejection. Finally, we repeated the previously described EEG
time-frequency analysis for these subjects after rejecting from our EEG
data the correspondingly flagged time points.
Results
Psychophysical measurements
Our first experiment examined the influence of various psycho-
physical parameters on the perception of the illusion. We used

Figure 1.
The flickering wheel illusion. The static wheel stimulus produces an impression of
flicker when it is observed in the visual periphery. Small eye movements, as when reading these
lines, can enhance the illusory effect. The flicker can also be perceived in the afterimage of the
stimulus. To experience this, after fixating the top-left black dot for ⬃10 s, switch your gaze to
the lower dot: an impression of flicker should be fleetingly present within the wheel’s afterim-
age on the right.

Materials and Methods
Subjects. Ten volunteers (3 female, mean age 29.2 ⫾ 4.8 years) partici-
pated in the psychophysical experiment and 21 (6 female; mean age
26.2 ⫾ 4.0 years; one left handed) in the EEG experiment. All subjects
showed normal or corrected to normal eye function. One participant was
excluded from the psychophysical experiment because his mean reported
flicker intensity was ⬎2 SDs away from the group average and one sub-
ject was excluded from the EEG experiment because ⬎50% of the EEG
data contained artifacts.

Stimuli. Stimuli were presented at 57 cm distance using a desktop com-
puter (2.09 GHz Intel processor, Windows XP) with a cathode ray monitor
(resolution: 800 ⫻ 600 pixels; refresh rate: 100 Hz) on a gray background
(luminance: 11.5 cd/m 2). Stimuli were designed and presented via the Psy-
chophysics Toolbox (Brainard, 1997) running in MATLAB (MathWorks).
For the matching task, the wheel stimuli (radius: 5 degrees of visual angle)
were presented with different contrast levels (20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and
100% Michelson contrast using uncorrected CRT ␥values, corresponding to
Michelson luminance contrast of 39%, 65%, 81%, 92%, and 96%, respec-
tively) and spatial frequencies with 8, 16, 32, or 64 dark and bright alternating
spokes. In the EEG smooth pursuit task, the fixation dot revolved (15 s/rev-
olution) at 13 degrees from the wheel center. For the EEG smooth pursuit
and the afterimage tasks, stimuli (radius: 7 degrees of visual angle) of the
illusory condition were adjusted for optimal flicker perception (100% con-
trast and 32 spoke sectors), whereas stimuli of the control condition showed
a different spatial frequency (8 spoke sectors) and did not lead to illusory
perception. The 32 spoke wheels had a lower spatial frequency cutoff of 0.73
cycles per degree at their outer edge, this value increasing to infinity toward
the wheel center.

