Tabellerna satta Kontrolleras noga
Kolla Figur1 sid 9 – fungerar den i s/v 

REPRODUCING AND RESHAPING ETHNIC RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION IN STOCKHOLM

REPRODUCING AND RESHAPING ETHNIC 

RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION IN STOCKHOLM: 
THE ROLE OF SELECTIVE MIGRATION MOVES

by

Roger Andersson

ANDERSSON, R. (2013): ‘Reproducing and reshaping ethnic res­
idential segregation in Stockholm: the role of selective migration 
moves’,  Geografiska  Annaler:  Series  B,  Human  Geography  95 
(2):163–187.

ABSTRACT. This paper deals with the issues of selective migra­
tion moves, and the production and reproduction of immigrant-
dense neighbourhoods in Stockholm, Sweden. It has been shown 
earlier that selective migration, that is, socioeconomic and eth­
nic  differences  between  those  leaving,  entering  and  staying  in 
so-called deprived neighbourhoods, reproduces these neighbour­
hoods’ characteristics of being poor and immigrant dense. Key 
concepts launched to inform such studies and derived from the US 
segregation discourse are “white flight” and “white avoidance”, 
meaning that native people (or white people in the US case) tend 
to leave neighbourhoods experiencing growing numbers of im­
migrants (black people) and which they also tend to avoid mov­
ing into such neighbourhoods. Using a complete set of geo-coded 
longitudinal individual data for the 2005–2008 Stockholm County 
population, this paper contributes to our understanding of ethnic 
differences in the intra-urban migration system. Three empirical 
questions  are  addressed:  what  individual  characteristics  distin­
guish (1) those who move into neighbourhoods experiencing rap­
idly increasing immigrant densities from those moving elsewhere 
in the urban region; (2) those who leave neighbourhoods expe­
riencing rapidly increasing immigrant densities from those who 
stay put; (3) those who move in the direction of higher immigrant 
densities from those moving into lower densities? Results from 
multivariate statistical analyses provide support for the avoidance 
hypothesis but less support for the flight hypothesis. When con­
trolling  for  a  range  of  individual  and  neighbourhood  attributes 
there is clear evidence that native-born Swedes are less inclined 
than most immigrant categories to move into immigrant dense are­
as while ethnic origin does not seem to matter much when explain­
ing who leaves such areas.

Keywords: ethnic segregation, flight avoidance, longitudinal data, 
selective migration, Sweden

Introduction
Ethnic residential segregation is a concern for pol­
iticians  and  urban  planners  and  has  consequently 
generated  substantial  interest  from  researchers  in 
different social science disciplines and in a grow­
ing number of countries. While this issue has long 
been on the agenda, especially in the USA and South 
Africa, rather limited interest was paid to segrega­
tion in European countries before the 1990s. Now, 

following  from  a  discourse  that  links  segregation 
with the perceived failure of integrating immigrants 
into host societies, the issue is vividly debated in 
countries such as France, the UK, the Netherlands, 
Belgium, Germany, and in Scandinavian countries 
including Sweden (Bolt et al. 2010). The topic is 
also increasingly discussed in Southern Europe, not 
least in the context of the financial crisis and rising 
inequalities (Arapoglou 2012; Kandylis et al. 2012).
 
If  one  believes  that  spatial  segregation  is  the 
cause of the lack of integration characterizing life 
for many immigrants – especially more recently ar­
rived refugee immigrants from the Middle East and 
Africa – it is natural to try to affect segregation pat­
terns  and  processes.  Such  attempts  take  different 
forms: housing mix programmes, (refugee) settle­
ment and dispersal policies, area-based urban pro­
grammes (Andersson et al. 2010). However, before 
engaging further in a debate concerning measures 
to avoid or mitigate segregation processes, the re­
search community needs to better analyse the dy­
namic  component  that  shapes  and  reproduces 
neighbourhood  population  compositions  and  the 
segregated city: migration. Without such process-
related knowledge – and of course more knowledge 
about whether ethnic segregation is harmful or not 
and for whom – policy interventions might be inef­
fective or even counter-productive. This article con­
tributes to the development of such process- related 
knowledge  while  leaving  the  consequence  issue 
aside.
 
It has been shown (Andersson and Bråmå 2004; 
Bråmå 2006; see also Wilson 1987; Jargovsky 1997; 
Bolt et al. 2008; Card et al. 2008) that selective mi­
gration,  that  is,  socioeconomic  and  ethnic  differ­
ences between those leaving, entering and staying 
in so-called deprived neighbourhoods, reproduces 
these neighbourhoods’ characteristics of being poor 
and immigrant dense. Key concepts launched to in­
form such studies and derived from the US discourse 
are “white flight” and “white avoidance” (see Ellen 

© The author 2013
Geografiska Annaler: Series B © 2013 Swedish Society for Anthropology and Geography

163

ROGER ANDERSSON

2000), meaning that native people (or “whites” in 
the US case) tend to leave neighbourhoods experi­
encing growing numbers of immigrants (“blacks”) 
and that they also tend to avoid moving into such 
neighbourhoods. Especially the flight notion often 
contains some kind of idea about thresholds, mean­
ing that whites start to move out in bigger numbers 
if the proportion of blacks exceeds a certain level 
(Card et al. 2008). In contrast to discourses of eth­
nic “self-segregation” that have given rise ‘to the 
myth that minority ethnic communities live, or wish 
to live, separate lives and disengage from wider …. 
society’ (Phillips 2006, p. 36), this author believes 
it is correct to place much focus on the natives’ (or 
the  majority’s)  role  in  producing  ethnic  residen­
tial segregation. This is also in line with the stand­
point put forward by Crowder et al. (2011, p. 41): 
‘While scholarly attention continues to focus on im­
migrants’ residential attainment processes, we call 
for additional attention to native-born populations’ 
mobility  reactions  to  these  immigrant  settlement 
patterns.’ While acknowledging the natives’ role we 
need to take the departure in the fact that segrega­
tion processes operate in cities comprising a system 
of neighbourhoods: what takes place in poor and/or 
immigrant-dense neighbourhoods is very much re­
lated to what takes place in other neighbourhoods 
(Jargovsky 1997, ch. 6; Bråmå 2011).
 
The new forms of diversity and multiculturalism 
in society are expected to influence residential loca­
tion decisions, and the ways in which immigrants 
and  natives  interact  in  neighbourhoods,  schools, 
playgrounds  and  workplaces.  Such  interaction,  in 
turn, has direct bearings on social cohesion and in­
tergroup understanding and tolerance (Wessel 2009; 
Galster  et  al.  2010).  In  the  Norface-funded  com­
parative research project NODES (Nordic welfare 
states and the dynamics and effects of ethnic resi­
dential segregation) we aim to study the dynamics 
and effects of ethnic residential segregation in four 
Nordic countries. This particular article has been de­
veloped in this research context and deals with the 
issues of selective migration moves, and the produc­
tion  and  reproduction  of  immigrant-dense  neigh­
bourhoods in Stockholm, Sweden.
Selective migration among natives, and its ef­
 
fects  upon  ethnic  segregation,  is  a  relatively  new 
field  of  research  in  the  Nordic  context.  Bråmå 
(2006) has analysed the role of Swedish majority 
populations.  She  concludes  that  selective  in-mi­
gration (particularly avoidance), and not selective 
out- migration (flight), is the main driver behind the 

production and reproduction of immigrant concen­
trations in contemporary Sweden. A study of school 
segregation in Oslo (Sundell 2008) produced simi­
lar results, although with a greater emphasis on se­
lective out-migration (i.e. the flight mechanism).
  Vilkama  (2010,  2011)  shows  that  despite 
Helsinki’s  much  lower  proportion  of  immigrants, 
both flight and avoidance are relevant concepts also 
in that context. She furthermore confirms what has 
also  been  found  for  Sweden:  out-migration  rates 
from  immigrant-dense  neighbourhoods  are  simi­
lar for immigrants and natives but immigrants tend 
to more often circulate within the same segment of 
neighbourhoods,  that  is  to  say,  immigrant-dense 
neighbourhoods (see also Jargovsky 1997).
  Other studies have documented selective migra­
tion among immigrants. Magnusson and Özüekren 
(2002) examined intra-urban mobility during 1975–
1990 among Turkish immigrants in three middle-
sized  Swedish  cities. Their  results  show  a  highly 
concentrated pattern of mobility. Later research in 
Sweden (see Andersson and Bråmå 2004), Denmark 
(Skifter Andersen 2010) and Norway (Blom 2006) 
present a more split picture: older, established im­
migrants tend to leave distressed/multiethnic areas, 
while recently arrived immigrants gravitate (volun­
tarily and/or are steered through institutional prac­
tices) towards these places. Skifter Andersen (2010), 
studying such housing estates in Denmark, stresses 
the importance of preferences, such as the desirabil­
ity for certain neighbourhood compositions. Many 
others have contributed to the research field, focus­
ing  on  for  instance  out-mobility  from  immigrant 
dense  and/or  socioeconomically  deprived  neigh­
bourhoods  and  on  the  effects  of  neighbourhood 
compositional change (Charles 2000; Clark 2002; 
Meen et al. 2005; Bailey and Livingston 2008; van 
Ham and Feijten 2008; Feijten and van Ham 2009; 
van Ham and Clark 2009; Pais et al. 2009; Crowder 
et al. 2011; Saiz and Wachter 2011).
This article will make use of longitudinal reg­
 
ister data and it aims at describing and analysing 
the ethnic compositional dynamics going on in the 
system  of  neighbourhoods  in  the  Stockholm  re­
gion. The key research question is whether native 
Swedes contribute to sustaining and reinforcing eth­
nic residential segregation by avoiding and leaving 
neighbourhoods that experience high and increasing 
immigrant density. The hypothesis is that this is in­
deed the case.
The empirical study will be carried out in three 
 
steps. The first is to identify neighbourhoods that 

164

© The author 2013
Geografiska Annaler: Series B © 2013 Swedish Society for Anthropology and Geography

