NO ˆUS 41:4 (2007) 663–685

Moral Responsibility and Determinism:
The Cognitive Science of Folk Intuitions

SHAUN NICHOLS

Department of Philosophy, University of Arizona

Department of Philosophy, University of North Carolina

JOSHUA KNOBE

1. Introduction

The dispute between compatibilists and incompatibilists must be one of the
most persistent and heated deadlocks in Western philosophy. Incompatibilists
maintain that people are not fully morally responsible if determinism is true,
i.e., if every event is an inevitable consequence of the prior conditions and
the natural laws. By contrast, compatibilists maintain that even if determin-
ism is true our moral responsibility is not undermined in the slightest, for
determinism and moral responsibility are perfectly consistent.1

The debate between these two positions has invoked many different re-
sources, including quantum mechanics, social psychology, and basic meta-
physics. But recent discussions have relied heavily on arguments that draw on
people’s intuitions about particular cases. Some philosophers have claimed
that people have incompatibilist intuitions (e.g., Kane 1999, 218; Strawson
1986, 30; Vargas 2006); others have challenged this claim and suggested that
people’s intuitions actually fit with compatibilism (Nahmias et al. 2005). But
although philosophers have constructed increasingly sophisticated arguments
about the implications of people’s intuitions, there has been remarkably lit-
tle discussion about why people have the intuitions they do. That is to say,
relatively little has been said about the specific psychological processes that
generate or sustain people’s intuitions. And yet, it seems clear that questions
about the sources of people’s intuitions could have a major impact on debates

C(cid:2) 2007, Copyright the Authors
Journal compilation C(cid:2) 2007, Blackwell Publishing, Inc.

663

664 NO ˆUS

about the compatibility of responsibility and determinism. There is an obvi-
ous sense in which it is important to figure out whether people’s intuitions
are being produced by a process that is generally reliable or whether they are
being distorted by a process that generally leads people astray.

Our aim here is to present and defend a hypothesis about the processes
that generate people’s intuitions concerning moral responsibility. Our hy-
pothesis is that people have an incompatibilist theory of moral responsibility
that is elicited in some contexts but that they also have psychological mech-
anisms that can lead them to arrive at compatibilist judgments in other con-
texts.2 To support this hypothesis, we report new experimental data. These
data show that people’s responses to questions about moral responsibility
can vary dramatically depending on the way in which the question is for-
mulated. When asked questions that call for a more abstract, theoretical
sort of cognition, people give overwhelmingly incompatibilist answers. But
when asked questions that trigger emotions, their answers become far more
compatibilist.

2. Affect, Blame, and the Attribution of Responsibility

In their attempts to get a handle on folk concepts and folk theories, natu-
ralistic philosophers have proceeded by looking at people’s intuitions about
particular cases (e.g., Knobe 2003a, 2003b; Nahmias et al. 2005; Nichols
2004a; Weinberg et al. 2001; Woolfolk et al. 2006). The basic technique is
simple. The philosopher constructs a hypothetical scenario and then asks
people whether, for instance, the agent in the scenario is morally responsible.
By varying the details of the case and checking to see how people’s intuitions
are affected, one can gradually get a sense for the contours of the folk theory.
This method is a good one, but it must be practiced with care. One cannot
simply assume that all of the relevant intuitions are generated by the same
underlying folk theory. It is always possible that different intuitions will turn
out to have been generated by different psychological processes.

Here we will focus especially on the role of affect in generating intuitions
about moral responsibility. Our hypothesis is that, when people are con-
fronted with a story about an agent who performs a morally bad behavior,
this can trigger an immediate emotional response, and this emotional re-
sponse can play a crucial role in their intuitions about whether the agent was
morally responsible. In fact, people may sometimes declare such an agent
to be morally responsible despite the fact that they embrace a theory of
responsibility on which the agent is not responsible.

Consider, for example, Watson’s (1987) interesting discussion of the crimes
of Robert Harris. Watson provides long quotations from a newspaper article
about how Harris savagely murdered innocent people, showing no remorse
for what he had done. Then he describes, in equally chilling detail, the hor-
rible abuse Harris had to endure as he was growing up. After reading all of

