PMPC Tutorial Sheet 2

1. What is the sample space in roulette? What is the event space in roulette?
How many possible events are there? What is the diﬀerence between
betting $18 on the even numbers and betting $1 on each even number?
How does the bank make money?

2. The following expression is a useful variant of Bayes’ rule:

P (A | B)

P (not A | B)

=

P (B | A)

P (B | not A)

· P (A)
P (not A)

.

The left-hand side are the posterior odds that A is true. The ﬁrst term
on the right-hand side is called the likelihood ratio; the second term are
the prior odds. Convince yourself that it is correct.

3. In a famous series of studies Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky exam-
ined judgements under uncertainty. In one of their experiments partici-
pants were given the following judgement task [4]:
A cab was involved in a hit and run accident at night. Two cab companies,
the Green and the Blue, operate in the city. You are given the following
data:
(a) 85% of the cabs in the city are Green and 15% are Blue
(b) a witness identiﬁed the cab as Blue. The court tested the reliability
of the witness under the same circumstances that existed on the night of
the accident and concluded that the witness correctly identiﬁed each one
of the two colors 80% of the time and failed 20% of the time. What is
the probability that the cab involved in the accident was Blue rather than
Green?
A large number of subjects were tested and the mode and the median of
the answers is 80%. What is the correct answer? What is going wrong?

4. Is medical screening sensible [1, 2]? To diagnose colorectal cancer the
hemocult test is conducted to detect occult in the stool. For symptom-free
people over 50 years old who participate in screening using the hemocult
test the following information is available:
Thirty out of 10,000 people have colorectal cancer. Of these 30 people
with the cancer, 15 will have a positive test result (The hemocult test
is not very sensitive, its hit-rate is only 50%). Of the remaining 9,970
people without the cancer, 300 will still have a positive hemocult test (the

1

false-alarm-rate is about 3%). Imagine a sample of people (over 50, no
symptoms) who have positive hemocult tests. How many of these people
actually have colorectal cancer?
What are the advantages of screening, i.e. testing a large number of people
who have no symptoms? What are the disadvantages?

5. For the last exercise write out the full joint probability table. Write
out both conditional distributions. Calculate both marginal distribu-
tions. What would the joint distribution look like if the result of the
hemocult test was independent of the patient having colorectal cancer but
the marginal distributions were the same? What would the conditional
distributions look like in this case?

6. Bonus question: The Monty Hall Problem (the presentation that Gerd
Gigerenzer [1, p. 217] gives is worthwhile reading). For about three
decades, Monty Hall hosted a popular American game show called Let’s
Make a Deal. The ﬁnal contestant is given the choice of three doors. Be-
hind one door is a car, behind the others goats. The contestant picks a
door, say number 1, and the host, who knows what’s behind the doors,
opens another door, say number 3, which has a goat. He asks the con-
testant whether he or she wants to switch to door number 2. Should the
contestant switch? Why?

7. Read the paper on learning Bayes’ Rule by Sedlmeier and Gigerenzer [3].

References
[1] G. Gigerenzer. Reckoning with Risk. Penguin Books Ltd, 2003.

[2] G. Gigerenzer, W. Gaissmaier, E. Kurz-Milcke, L. M. Schwartz, and
S. Woloshin. Helping doctors and patients make sense of health statistics.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 8(2):53–96, 2007.

[3] P. Sedlmeier and G. Gigerenzer. Teaching Bayesian reasoning in less than
two hours. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130(3):380–400,
2001.

[4] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman. Evidential impact of base rates. In D. Kah-
neman, P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, editors, Judgment under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases, pages 153–160. Cambridge University Press, 1982.

2

