J. Math. Biol. 43, 221–246 (2001)
Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI):
10.1007/s002850000078

F. Berezovskaya · G. Karev · R. Arditi

Mathematical Biology

Parametric analysis of the ratio-dependent
predator–prey model

Received: 24 December 1999 / Revised version: 27 October 2000 /
Published online: 21 August 2001 – c(cid:1) Springer-Verlag 2001

Abstract. We present a complete parametric analysis of stability properties and dynamic
regimes of an ODE model in which the functional response is a function of the ratio of
prey and predator abundances. We show the existence of eight qualitatively different types
of system behaviors realized for various parameter values. In particular, there exist areas of
coexistence (which may be steady or oscillating), areas in which both populations become
extinct, and areas of “conditional coexistence” depending on the initial values. One of the
main mathematical features of ratio-dependent models, distinguishing this class from other
predator–prey models, is that the Origin is a complicated equilibrium point, whose charac-
teristics crucially determine the main properties of the model. This is the ﬁrst demonstration
of this phenomenon in an ecological model. The model is investigated with methods of the
qualitative theory of ODEs and the theory of bifurcations. The biological relevance of the
mathematical results is discussed both regarding conservation issues (for which coexistence
is desired) and biological control (for which extinction is desired).

1. Introduction

The construction and study of models for the population dynamics of predator–prey
systems have remained an important area in theoretical ecology since the famous
Lotka-Volterra equations. These authors set a framework which is still followed
today: a system of two differential equations, with a simple correspondence (usually
proportionality) between prey consumption and predator production. A most crucial
element in these models is the “functional response” or “trophic function”, the
function that describes the number of prey consumed per predator per unit time for
given quantities of prey N and predators P .

Much early work was only concerned with the way in which this function varies
with prey density (e.g., the so-called Holling types I, II, III), ignoring the effect of
predator density. Even today, most simulation models developed for applications

F. Berezovskaya, G. Karev: Center for Problems of Forest Ecology and Productivity,
Russian Academy of Sciences, 62 Novocheremushkinskaya str., Moscow 117418, Russia.
e-mail: fsberezo@hotmail.com; gkarev@hotmail.com. Current
address:
School of Mathematics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
R. Arditi (author for correspondence): Institut National Agronomique Paris-Grignon,
Ecologie des Populations et Communaut´es, 16 rue Claude Bernard, 75231 Paris
Cedex 05, France. e-mail: arditi@inapg.inra.fr

Key words or phrases: Dynamical system – Phase portrait – Bifurcation – Complicated
singular point – Population dynamics – Biological control

222

F. Berezovskaya et al.

assume that the trophic function is a function of prey density only. This was labeled
“prey-dependence” by Arditi and Ginzburg (1989).

It is known that only stable equilibrium coexistence of predators and prey or ex-
tinction of predators are possible in the framework of the “classical” Lotka-Volterra
model with quadratic (logistic) prey growth. An additional regime of oscillating
coexistence can arise in various models with saturation of the trophic function (e.g.,
Rosenzweig 1971, Bazykin 1998).

Note that such models cannot describe the experimental observations (e.g.,
Huffaker 1958, Luckinbill 1973) that, with given values of system parameters,
the predator population or both populations can either become extinct or coexist,
depending on the initial population values. Moreover, the extinction can be accom-
panied by oscillations. Additionally, simple prey-dependent models cannot produce
situations of biological control, i.e., durable coexistence of a pest (the prey) with
its predator at a mean abundance being much lower than the prey carrying ca-
pacity (Luck 1990). This was labelled “paradox of biological control” (Arditi and
Berryman 1991).

It was recognized early that the predator density could have a direct effect on
the trophic function. A number of such “predator-dependent” models (in the sense
of Arditi and Ginzburg 1989) have been proposed, the most widely known being
those of Hassell and Varley (1969), DeAngelis et al. (1975), or Beddington (1975).
Arditi and Ginzburg (1989) have suggested that the essential properties of
predator-dependence could be rendered by a simpler form which was called “ratio-
dependence”. The trophic function is assumed to depend on the single variable N/P
rather than on the two separate variables N and P . When considered in community-
level situations (i.e., food chains and food webs), it was shown that ratio-dependent
models make more reasonable predictions than their prey-dependent counterparts
(Arditi and Berryman 1991, Arditi et al. 1991, Hanski 1991, Michalski and Arditi
1995, Arditi and Michalski 1996).

The ratio-dependent hypothesis has aroused a heated controversy (e.g., Ruxton
and Gurney 1992, Arditi et al. 1992, Abrams 1994, Diehl et al. 1994, Sarnelle 1994,
Akc¸akaya et al. 1995), mainly due to the fact that, at ﬁrst, the main arguments were
phenomenological. However, a number of mechanistic models have now shown
how ratio-dependent (or, more generally, predator-dependent) trophic functions
can emerge on the global scale with the local law of interaction still being the
prey-dependent Lotka-Volterra model. Spatial and/or temporal heterogeneities are
essential ingredients of these mechanistic models (Michalski et al. 1997, Poggiale
et al. 1998, Cosner et al. 1999). Fortunately, the controversy seems to be coming
to a more moderate level, with both parties agreeing on a number of basic points
and recognizing some merits in both approaches (Abrams and Ginzburg 2000).

From the mathematical point of view, ratio-dependent predator–prey models
raise delicate questions because the functional response is undeﬁned at the origin
N = 0, P = 0. As a consequence, the origin is a so-called “complicated point”, as it
will be shown here. Ratio-dependent models can display original dynamic proper-
ties that have never been observed in earlier simple two-dimensional predator–prey
models. For example, the origin can be a node simultaneously attractive and repul-
sive, thus shedding new light on ecological extinction, particularly in the context

