Ethics Inf Technol (2013) 15:99–107
DOI 10.1007/s10676-012-9301-2

O R I G I N A L P A P E R

On the moral responsibility of military robots

Thomas Hellstro¨m

Published online: 9 September 2012
Ó Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

Abstract This article discusses mechanisms and princi-
ples for assignment of moral responsibility to intelligent
robots, with special focus on military robots. We introduce
the concept autonomous power as a new concept, and use it
to identify the type of robots that call for moral consider-
ations. It is furthermore argued that autonomous power,
and in particular the ability to learn,
is decisive for
assignment of moral responsibility to robots. As techno-
logical development will lead to robots with increasing
autonomous power, we should be prepared for a future
when people blame robots for their actions. It is important
to, already today, investigate the mechanisms that control
human behavior in this respect. The results may be used
when designing future military robots, to control unwanted
tendencies to assign responsibility to the robots. Indepen-
dent of the responsibility issue, the moral quality of robots’
behavior should be seen as one of many performance
measures by which we evaluate robots. How to design
ethics based control systems should be carefully investi-
gated already now. From a consequentialist view, it would
indeed be highly immoral to develop robots capable of
performing acts involving life and death, without including
some kind of moral framework.
Keywords Moral responsibility  Robots 
Military robots  Autonomy  Robot ethics

T. Hellstro¨m (&)
Department of Computing Science, Umea˚ University,
Umea˚, Sweden
e-mail: thomash@cs.umu.se

Introduction

This article discusses possible mechanisms and principles
for assignment of moral responsibility to intelligent robots.
Special focus is on military robots, which are being mas-
sively introduced by a large number of armies around the
world.1 The military robots will become more and more
autonomous and lethal, and responsibility issues must be
discussed as well as extended to match the new reality. The
article is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview
of existing battleﬁeld robots. In Sect. 3, these robots are
classiﬁed based on autonomous power, a new concept
introduced as an extension of the autonomy concept. This
helps to identify the kind of robots that should come into
question when discussing responsibility. Section 4 ana-
lyzes in what way moral responsibility may be applicable
to robots, and how it
relates to autonomous power.
Assignments of moral responsibility in hypothetical war
scenarios with and without robots are analyzed in Sect. 5,
followed by a ﬁnal discussion and conclusions in Sect. 6.

Robots in warfare

The last decade has seen an intense research and devel-
opment of military Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs)
and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). The results are
already put in extensive use in armed conﬂicts around the
world (Wezeman 2007 p. 5–6, Singer 2009a, b). However,
the use of military robots is not at all a new idea. For
instance, UAVs have been used by several armed forces

1 Between 50 and 80 countries either already use or are in the process
of acquiring the technology to start using military robots (ABIre-
search 2011).

123

100

T. Hellstro¨m

since the 1960s (Wezeman 2007). The early UAVs were
not armed but mainly carried out reconnaissance missions,
and this is still the case for the majority of all UAVs.
Models such as the MQ-9 Reaper are about to change this.
A representative of the U.S. Air Force explains (U.S. Air
Force 2006): ‘‘We’ve moved from using UAVs primarily
in intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance roles
before Operation Iraqi Freedom, to a true hunter-killer role
with the Reaper’’. The ﬁrst large scale use of armed UAVs
in combat operations was the attacks carried out by the
U.S. against Taliban and Al Qaeda leaders in Yemen and
Afghanistan in 2002 and 2003 (Bone and Bolkcom 2003).
Still, all UAVs are mainly tele-operated, and the operator
controls ﬁring of arms. Future development plans for
UAVs include multi-robot systems, either centralized
(mothership style) or decentralized (swarm style). A
mothership plane would launch a large number of UAVs,
coordinate and control their actions and later recover them
in the air. The swarm approach uses a large number of
independent UAVs. Rather than being centrally controlled,
each unit decides what to do on its own, resulting in highly
effective overall results (Singer 2009c).

Several types of military UGVs are also extensively
used. By the end of 2008, there were about 12,000 robots
operating on the ground in Iraq (Singer 2009a, b). Most of
these vehicles/robots are not armed but are used for sniper
detection, disrupting or exploding explosive devices and
surveillance in dangerous areas. One of the most common
models for this kind of military operations is the PackBot
(Yamauchi 2004) from iRobot (iRobot 2012), the manu-
facturer of the Roomba robot vacuum cleaner. This robot is
equipped with cameras and communication equipment and
an optional arm with manipulator. Its small size enables
it to be carried by a soldier in a backpack. Through the
operator’s control unit, the soldier tele-operates the robot
and views the output from the cameras and other sensors.
The PackBot is typically used to enter buildings, report on
possible occupants, and trigger booby traps. It may also be
equipped with special sensors for sniper detection. The
Bloodhound (Yamauchi et al. 2002), a new version of the
PackBot, will be able to search for injured soldiers and
provide some rudimentary treatment. Further development
of this robot will include capabilities to drag an injured
soldier to safety. The SWORDS (GlobalSecurity 2012)
(Special Weapons Observation Remote Direct-Action
System) robot made by Foster–Miller can be equipped
with machine guns, grenade launchers, or anti-tank rocket
launchers as well as cameras and other sensors. The robot
is able to navigate on its own with a satellite navigation
system (GPS). At present, a soldier navigates and ﬁres on-
board weapons by teleoperation from a safe distance away.
While SWORDS robots have been deployed in Iraq, the
scarce information available indicates that they have so far

123

not ﬁred a single shot in ﬁeld (Sofge 2009). The manu-
facturer is currently working on a successor, the MAARS
(Modular Advanced Armed Robotic System)
robot
(QineticQ 2012).

The Phalanx is an anti-ship missile system that has been
in service since the 800, primarily by the U.S. Navy (U.S.
Navy 2011). It consists of a machine gun mounted on a
rotating base. In automatic mode it searches, detects,
evaluates,
intervention of
human operators. The decision to ﬁre is taken by a com-
puterized radar system estimating speed and direction for
approaching objects. The Phalanx is being constantly
upgraded and has reportedly been deployed in the navies of
24 nations (Raytheon 2009).

tracks, and engages without

range ﬁnders,

The SGR-1 Security Guard Robot

from Samsung
(Samsung 2012) is a stationary system developed for the
Korean Demilitarized Zone. It is able to detect and identify
targets in daylight and at night, using a combination of
laser
low-light high-resolution cameras,
thermal cameras and infrared sensors. The system may be
equipped with machine guns and an acoustic device that
‘‘emits a tone powerful enough to make intruders nauseous
and drop to the ground’’ (Hildebrand 2009). This provides
for either lethal or non-lethal response. The system can be
operated manually but also has an automatic mode in
which it ﬁres on its own.

To summarize, the robots used in war zones today vary
considerably regarding lethality and degrees of self-man-
agement. The vast majority of all military robots are tele-
operated and not equipped with any kind of weapons. They
are used for supporting functions such as surveillance,
sniper detection and neutralizing explosive devices. Some
robots, notably UAVs, are equipped with weapons con-
trolled by tele-operation. A few ground based robotic
systems that automatically ﬁre are in use, primarily in
restricted border areas and at sea. A few armed autonomous
mobile robots have been developed and introduced to the
battleﬁelds, primarily for evaluation.

Classiﬁcation of robots

In this section, an attempt to classify robots based on their
degree of self-management and lethality is made. Self-
management relates to the notion of autonomy, a word
with many proposed meanings and deﬁnitions. During a
research meeting organized by EUCogII in Groningen
2011 (http://www.eucognition.org), more than one hundred
researchers from a wide spectrum of disciplines spent
considerable time discussing their views on the matter.
While no conclusive deﬁnition was neither anticipated nor
reached, several keywords reappeared during the discus-
sions: independence, self-ruling, internal agenda, internal

