Updated March 2004 
© March 2004, Davis Malm & D'Agostine, P.C 

An Introduction To Business Organizations 

William F. Griffin, Jr. 

Davis, Malm & D'Agostine, P.C. 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

The following outline is intended to acquaint the reader with the different forms in which 

businesses are commonly conducted.  It is greatly simplified.  
 

I. 

COMMON FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The seven most common forms of business organizations are: 

 

 

 

 

 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

the sole proprietorship; 

the general partnership; 

the limited partnership; 

the business trust with transferable shares;  

the business corporation;  

the limited liability company; and  

the limited liability partnership. 

Each of these forms of business organizations differs from the others in terms of 
(a) governing law, (b) the formalities of organization, (c) control and management of the 
business, (d) personal liability of the owners, (e) continuity of legal existence and 
(f) transferability of interests in the business.  Each has distinctive tax advantages and 
disadvantages. 
 

The distinguishing characteristics of each form of business organization under 

Massachusetts law are discussed in Sections II-VIII below.  The principal tax consequences of 
each form of business organization are discussed in summary fashion in Section IX. 
 

II. 

THE SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP 

 

The simplest form of a business organization is the sole proprietorship.  A sole 

proprietorship consists of an individual doing business for himself or herself.  For example, an 
individual attorney, practicing alone or with a hired associate, paralegal, or secretary, is a sole 
proprietor. 
 

A. 

Governing Law 

 

No specific statute governs the formation of a sole proprietorship.  A sole proprietorship, 

like every other form of business organization, is, of course, subject to any licensing or other 
requirements applicable to the kind of business or the particular activities in which it may 
engage.  Sole proprietorships, like any other form of business not specifically exempted, must 
comply with the "business name statute,"  G. L. c. 110.  The business name statute is discussed in 
greater detail in Section XI infra. 
 

B. 

Formalities of Organization 

 

 

 

No formal document or filing is required for the creation of a sole proprietorship.   

C. 

Control and Management 

The owner of a sole proprietorship is in full and absolute control of the business.  No one 

else has a right to participate in management, although the owner may by contract delegate 
authority to employees or agents.  A sole proprietor does not share profits and must bear all 
losses of the business. 
 

D. 

Liability of Owner 

 

In the absence of a contract to the contrary, a sole proprietor is personally liable for all 

obligations of the business to the full extent of his personal and business assets.  He or she is also 
liable for any torts which he personally commits, as well as for those committed by his 
employees within the scope of their employment.  Certain potential tort liabilities may, of course, 
be covered by insurance. 
 

E. 

Continuity of Existence 

 

A sole proprietorship terminates on the death of the proprietor.  Thus, a sole 

proprietorship, technically, has no continuity of existence. 
 

 
 

2

