 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
Guidelines for Gender Sensitive Research 
Prepared by Brigitte Leduc  
 
November 2009 

 

What is a gender sensitive research? 
Gender sensitive research is not research on women or on 
gender relationships; it is research that takes into account 
gender  as  a  significant  variable  in  environmental  and 
development  studies.  Men  and  women  have  different 
roles,  which  impact  differently  on  the  environment  and 
development. Moreover, the power relations between men 
and women can greatly influence the perspective of men 
and women on environmental and development problems. 
Thus,  gender  sensitive  research  pays  attention  to  the 
similarities and the differences between men and women’s 
experiences  and  viewpoints,  and  gives  equal  value  to 
each. 

What is the problem with traditional research? 
Remembering  that  women  constitute  the  other  half  of  the 
population is important. Overlooking women’s experiences 
and points of view leads to the wrong conclusions, or at 
least an incomplete picture of the problem. 
In  the  Hindu  Kush-Himalayan  region,  research  on  the 
environment and development seldom considers gender as 
a  significant  variable.  Environmental  research  often  pays 
little  attention  to  the  human  and  social  dimensions.  The 
impact of the population on the environment is examined 
in  relation  to  ‘population  activities’,  but  rarely  taking  into 
account the gender dimension: ‘population’ is treated as a 
homogenous  group.  Poverty  assessment  also  bases  its 
analysis  on  household  incomes  and  expenditures;  the 
differential  experiences  of  poverty  among  household 
members  is  rarely  analysed.  Moreover,  only  productive 
paid work is taken into account and valued in economic 
analysis,  while  household  and  unpaid  work  –  mainly 
performed by women – is overlooked, even if it makes up 
a  large  part  of  food  security.  Therefore,  in  traditional 
research,  women’s  experiences  and  contributions  remain 
invisible, and, consequently, important aspects of an issue 
remain undocumented and underestimated and, therefore, 
may be misunderstood. 
Gender  has  only  recently  been  considered  a  significant 
variable in research. However, although it is starting to be 
recognised in social sciences, it is seldom acknowledged 
and applied in natural sciences or economics. The choice 
of 
and 
methodology, analysis  framework,  and  language  used in 
scientific  articles  tends  to  reflect  male  biases  and 
patriarchal values.  

conceptual 

framework 

research 

topic, 

Scientists often argue that they do distinguish between men 
and  women  and,  thus,  do  not  discriminate  and  are 
objective. Women researching on women’s issues are still 
often  accused  of  subjectivity,  while  men  who  overlook 
women’s perspectives and generalise their findings to the 
overall  population  related  to  their  issue  are  considered 
objective. 

What are the benefits of engendering 
research? 

into 

improve 

research  can 

A better understanding of the problem 
Engendering  research  does  not  change  the  scope  of  the 
research;  it  provides  new  perspectives,  raises  new 
questions,  and  uses  new  analysis  tools  to  create  a  more 
complete picture of the problem. As men and women have 
different roles and different power, their perspectives on a 
problem can be quite different. By combining their different 
experiences and viewpoints, researchers can enhance the 
comprehension  of  a  problem.  Therefore,  integrating  a 
gender  perspective 
its 
relevance, coverage, and quality (ADEA Working Group 
on Higher Education 2006, p. 4). For example, research 
to  identify  the  impacts  of  global  climate  change  in  the 
Hindu  Kush-Himalayas  would  be  more  precise  if  it 
integrates in its analysis framework the impacts on human 
activities, livelihoods, and vulnerability to natural hazards. 
As  men  and  women  have  different  roles,  and  as  their 
respective  social  status  and  the  power  relations  could 
impact on their capacity to adapt to climate change, the 
gender  dimension  is  quite  relevant  and  will  enhance  the 
results  of  the  research  and  increase  its  usefulness  to 
policymakers.  
A  study  on  the  value  chain  of  medicinal  plants  that 
includes a gender perspective would contribute not only to 
identifying who is doing what and what needs to be done 
to increase the producers’ benefits, it could also contribute 
to  identifying  measures  to  ensure  equitable  benefits  for 
producers  and  processors  for  both  men  and  women, 
increasing its impact to reduce poverty. 

Methodologies that empower 
A  gender  sensitive  research  methodology  is  usually  more 
participatory  and  can  contribute  greatly  to  empowering 
people,  notably  women.  It  helps  both  men  and  women 
concerned by a problem to analyse an issue, understand 
its causes, and find solutions. 

( 1 ) 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
In  research  aiming  to  identify  the  vulnerabilities  of 
mountain  people  to  natural  disasters,  a  gender  sensitive 
participatory  approach  helps  men  and  women 
to 
understand  the  natural  and  social  factors  –  beliefs, 
practices, behaviours – that put them at risk when a natural 
disaster  occur.  It  can  also  help  them  to  understand  that 
some social practices may increase women and children’s 
vulnerabilities and that in order to reduce these risks they 
may have to modify their behaviour.  
A  gender  sensitive  methodology  can  also  contribute  to 
making visible and giving a value to women’s contribution 
to  biodiversity  and  natural 
resources  management. 
Eventually, this can contribute to raising awareness about 
women’s capacities and to boosting their self-confidence.  

research 

Sustainable environmental policies 
Gender-sensitive 
that  highlights  men’s  and 
women’s  perspectives,  contributions,  and  needs  can 
influence  policymakers  and  contribute  to  gender  sensitive 
policies that address both men’s and women’s needs and, 
thus, leads to more efficient and effective policies.  
A survey on watersheds could contribute to identifying both 
men’s  and  women’s  needs  and  to  recommendations  for 
watershed  policy  that  ensures  equitable  access  to  water 
resources and equitable participation of men and women 
in watershed management. 

technical  and 

requires  not  only 

Sustainable mountain development  
It  is  important  that  research  focusing  on  mountain 
development  and  the  preservation  of  natural  resources 
integrates social aspects. Even when research seems more 
technical,  integrating  a  gender  dimension  can  be  very 
useful,  because  it  brings  a  social  dimension  to  the 
problem.  Research  to  identify  appropriate  solutions  to 
protect  biodiversity  in  the  Hindu  Kush-Himalayas,  for 
example, 
legal 
examination,  but  also  a  look  at  the  social  aspects, 
notably,  the  gender  dimension.  If  ignored,  the  solutions 
identified may be negative for the populations: they could 
deprive men of income opportunities or increase women’s 
workload,  and,  consequently,  the  populations  work 
against  the  solutions  recommended  by  the  research  in 
order  to  exploit  the  resources.  However,  if  the  social 
dimensions of the problem and the gender perspective are 
properly  taken  into  account,  the solutions identified could 
make the populations more responsible and even play an 
active role in ensuring the protection and regeneration of 
natural resources. 
Research  should  also  identify  the  impacts  of  proposed 
solutions on men and women; on their workload; on their 
capacities to access resources; on their social status; and 
on social and power relations. This analysis could be very 
helpful when it is time to choose the solutions that will be 
the most efficient, socially accepted, and, thus, viable.  

Guidelines for engendering research 
Engendering research means that the gender dimension is 
mainstreamed  into  every  component  of  the  research: 
identifying  the  problem;  defining  the  conceptual  and 
analytical 
the  methodology; 
analysing the findings; and disseminating the results. 

framework; 

choosing 

Acknowledge our own bias 
Scientific  research  is  not  neutral.  The  position  of  the 
researcher, their interests, and values affect how and what 
research topics are chosen, who they work with, and the 
perspective and method of research. Even the researcher’s 
position in society (in term of gender, class, ethnicity, and 
age)  may  influence  the  way  in  which  the  research  is 
conducted, how the information is analysed, and how the 
results  are  interpreted.  Deciding  what  information  is 
relevant  is  not  always  an  objective  process:  local 
knowledge  and  information  provided  by  marginalised 
groups is often given less value than information provided 
by decision makers, other scientists, or like-minded people.  
In  order 
to 
acknowledge  our  own  bias,  preferences,  values,  and 
socio-cultural background, and to be constantly aware that 
these  factors  could  influence  the  process  of  the  research 
and its findings. 

to  achieve  objectivity, 

important 

it 

is 

Define a conceptual framework reflecting 
men’s and women’s experiences 
There  are  many  aspects  to  take  into  consideration  in  the 
conceptual framework to avoid a male bias and to ensure 
an inclusive and gender sensitive approach.  

Ensure gender sensitive formulation of the 
research question 
The formulation of the research question should integrate a 
gender perspective: i.e., how are men and women 
currently affected by the issue and how are they involved 
in the issue? 

Use inclusive definitions of concepts; avoid 
male bias, prejudices and generalisations 
If  men  and  women  have  different  experiences  related  to 
the  field  of  research,  it  is  likely  that  they  have  different 
definitions  of  concepts.  Gender  sensitive  research  should 
pay attention to and integrate different perspectives when 
defining concepts. It can be useful to try to identify if male 
and female scientists give the same definition and use the 
same  conceptual  framework.  Including  publications  by 
both male and female scientists in the review of literature 
could be useful for this purpose. 
It is important not to generalise the concepts to the ‘overall 
population’ if the issue concerns only men or if only men’s 
perspectives have been documented. For example, men’s 

( 2 ) 

