R E P O R T S

Sparse Coding and

Decorrelation in Primary Visual
Cortex During Natural Vision

William E. Vinje1,2 and Jack L. Gallant1,3*

Theoretical studies suggest that primary visual cortex (area V1) uses a sparse
code to efﬁciently represent natural scenes. This issue was investigated by
recording from V1 neurons in awake behaving macaques during both free
viewing of natural scenes and conditions simulating natural vision. Stimulation
of the nonclassical receptive ﬁeld increases the selectivity and sparseness of
individual V1 neurons, increases the sparseness of the population response
distribution, and strongly decorrelates the responses of neuron pairs. These
effects are due to both excitatory and suppressive modulation of the classical
receptive ﬁeld by the nonclassical receptive ﬁeld and do not depend critically
on the spatiotemporal structure of the stimuli. During natural vision, the
classical and nonclassical receptive ﬁelds function together to form a sparse
representation of the visual world. This sparse code may be computationally
efﬁcient for both early vision and higher visual processing.

Although area V1 has been studied for over
40 years, little is known about how V1 en-
codes complex natural scenes. Theoretical stud-
ies suggest that natural scenes can be efficient-
ly represented by a sparse code based on
filters that resemble neurons found in area V1
(1, 2). Sparse codes lie along a continuum
ranging from dense codes, where neurons
respond to most stimuli, to local codes, where
neurons give extremely selective responses
(3). Both of these extremes are inefficient in
several important respects. Dense codes are
highly redundant and each neural response
carries little information, whereas local codes
require an implausibly large number of neu-
rons and are computationally intractable. In
contrast, neurons that are tuned to match the
sparsely distributed, informative components
of the natural world can produce sparse codes.
Sparse codes transmit information with min-
imal redundancy and relatively few spikes.
Consequently, they are both informationally
and metabolically more efficient than dense
codes (4). There have been a few studies of
sparse coding in inferior temporal visual ar-
eas (5). We have addressed this issue in area
V1.

Recent

theoretical studies suggest

that
nonlinear interactions between neurons may
increase coding sparseness in area V1 (2, 6).
These interactions are predominantly reflect-
ed in modulation of classical receptive field
(CRF) responses by the surrounding nonclas-
sical receptive field (nCRF) (7). Previous ex-

1Program in Neuroscience, 2Department of Molecular
and Cellular Biology, and 3Department of Psychology,
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720 –1650, USA.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-
mail: gallant@socrates.berkeley.edu

periments have demonstrated that nCRF stim-
ulation strongly modulates responses during
free viewing of natural scenes (8). This report
demonstrates that V1 employs a sparse code
to represent natural scenes and shows that the
nCRF plays a crucial role in this process.

We have addressed this issue by using
controlled stimuli that simulate natural vi-
sion. The stimuli were sequences of images
simulating the spatial and temporal patterns
occurring in and around the CRF when an
animal freely views a static natural scene (see
Fig. 1A). Eye scan paths were generated with
a statistical model of eye movements made
during free viewing (9). Image patches were
extracted from a natural scene along the sim-
ulated scan path and converted to gray scale
(10). Each natural vision movie was com-
posed of a series of simulated fixations sep-
arated by brief simulated saccadic transitions.
In the experiments described here, we ma-
nipulated the size of the extracted image
patches. Patch size varied from one to four
times the diameter of the CRF. To reduce
potential boundary artifacts, the outer 10% of
each image patch was blended smoothly into
the neutral gray background. Data reported
here are from 61 well-isolated neurons re-
corded in area V1 of two awake behaving
primates (11).

The sparseness of V1 responses increases
dramatically with larger natural image patch-
es that encompass both the CRF and the
nCRF. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 1,
which compares responses obtained with
stimuli confined to the CRF (Fig. 1B) with
those obtained with stimuli four times the
diameter of the CRF (Fig. 1C). To quantify
sparseness we used a nonparametric statistic
(12): S ⫽ {1 ⫺ [(⌺ri/n)2/⌺(ri
2/n)]}/[1 ⫺ (1/n)],
where ri is the response to the ith frame of a

movie (averaged across trials) and n is the
number of movie frames. Values of S near
0% indicate a dense code, and values near
100% indicate a sparse code.

Distributions of S across the sample of
neurons are shown in Fig. 2 for each stimulus
size. As stimulus size increases, sparseness
increases systematically (P ⬍ 0.01) (13). The
sparseness statistic saturates when stimuli are
three to four times the size of the CRF,
consistent with the spatial extent of V1 nCRF
modulation reported in other studies (7). The
high sparseness values produced by large
stimuli suggest that area V1 uses a sparse
code during natural vision, when stimuli span
the entire visual field.

The simulated saccades in our natural vi-
sion movies often produce large transient re-
sponses followed by rapid adaptation during
the course of the fixation. To assess the con-
tribution of this fine temporal structure to
sparseness, we recomputed the sparseness
statistic after averaging all responses within
each fixation. Absolute sparseness values are
significantly lower in the fixation-based anal-
ysis (P ⬍ 0.05), but sparseness still increases
with increasing nCRF stimulation (14). Thus,
transient responses and adaptation contribute
to sparseness but do not account for all of the
observed nCRF effects.

We reanalyzed a subset of cells to deter-
mine whether these sparsening effects were
due to nCRF suppression, excitation, or both
(n ⫽ 36 cells; stimuli four times the CRF
diameter). Twenty-nine percent of all
the
frames in this sample are significantly mod-
ulated (P ⬍ 0.05), and the ratio of suppres-
sion to excitation is about 4.5 to 1. Excitation
is often concentrated in the onset transients
that occur after simulated saccades, whereas
suppression reduces responses across an en-
tire fixation. Thus, natural nCRF stimulation
appears to increase sparseness by both en-
hancing and suppressing specific epochs of
the response.

It

is unlikely that

these results are an
artifact of incorrect CRF definition (15). We
defined the CRF as the circular region cir-
cumscribing all locations where stimuli evoked
action potentials. Overestimation of CRF siz-
es would cause inadvertent nCRF stimulation
by movies confined to the nominal CRF,
thereby increasing estimates of CRF sparse-
ness and decreasing the apparent sparsening
effects of nCRF stimulation.

We also performed a control experiment
to ensure that our sparseness estimates did
not depend on the position of the patch
boundary, which necessarily varied with patch
size. The control stimulus consisted of a nat-
ural vision movie four times the CRF diam-
eter on which a sharp, white ring was super-
imposed along the exterior boundary of the
defined CRF. The ring provided a strong
artificial edge to enhance the magnitude of

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 287 18 FEBRUARY 2000

1273

R E P O R T S

modulation by extraretinal factors such as eye
movements and attention (16). We examined
how these extraretinal factors affect sparse-
ness by comparing responses obtained during
free viewing of natural scenes (17) to re-
sponses obtained with natural vision movies
that re-created the visual stimulation occur-
ring in the CRF and the surround during the
same free-viewing episodes (18). Both free-
viewing and natural vision movie data were
acquired in 11 V1 neurons (17 separate free-
viewing episodes). Sparseness values ob-
tained during free viewing and with natural
vision movies are highly correlated (r ⫽
0.91). However, the slope of the regression
line is 1.2, which suggests that free viewing
produces a slightly more sparse response than
do natural vision movies simulating free
viewing. Given that the movies may not fully
stimulate the nCRF of some cells, this small

difference is expected, but we cannot rule out
the possibility of weak extraretinal effects.

As a final control, we examined sparse-
ness values obtained with dynamic grating
sequences (n ⫽ 22 neurons) (19) to see if
sparsening is specific to natural stimuli. To
compare response sparseness for
random
grating sequences and natural vision movies,
we computed S for both stimulus types and
for stimuli one and two times the size of the
CRF. The sparseness values obtained with
gratings and natural vision movies are not
significantly different from each other, which
suggests that sparseness might be induced by
oriented energy present in both natural stim-
uli and grating sequences.

The sparse coding hypothesis also pre-
dicts that responses will be sparse when ex-
amined across the population of neurons in
V1. To investigate this, we evaluated the
kurtosis of the response distribution (RD)
obtained with each stimulus size. The RD is
the histogram of responses (i.e., action poten-
tials per movie frame) pooled over all cells
and all stimuli; it is an estimate of the popu-
lation response of V1 to an ensemble of

any potential edge effects. Ring trials were
randomly interleaved with non-ring trials.
The addition of the CRF-diameter ring in-
creases sparseness by an average of 8% (n ⫽
12 neurons) relative to that observed without
the ring. Thus, sparseness estimates for CRF-
diameter stimuli may be inflated slightly be-
cause of the presence of the sharp border,
which suggests that our estimates of the
sparsening effects of nCRF stimulation prob-
ably underestimate the true size of this effect.
The data presented above were acquired
with controlled stimuli that simulate natural
vision. During natural free viewing, V1 ac-
tivity reflects both visual stimulation and

A

B

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

C

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

CRF

4xCRF

0

1.5

3.0

Time (s)

4.5

Fig. 1. Natural vision movie and representative
responses. (A) Example of a natural scene used
as the source image for natural vision movies.
White line represents simulated visual scan
path. Image patches centered on the scan path
were extracted to form the movie. Small white
circle gives the CRF size; larger circle is four
times the CRF diameter. (B) Raster plot of
action potentials during 20 presentations of a
movie conﬁned to the CRF. The number of
action potentials during each 13.8-ms movie
frame is indicated by intensity. Solid line is the
peri-stimulus
time histogram (PSTH). The
sparseness of these data is 16%, which implies
a dense distribution of responses across the
stimulus set. (C) Raster plot of action potentials
during 20 presentations of a movie with a
stimulus size four times the CRF diameter. Dark
line again gives the PSTH. Stimulation of the
nCRF increases sparseness to 53%.

Fig. 2. Stimulation of the nCRF increases
sparseness in single neurons. Effects of stimulus
size on distribution of the sparseness statistic
across the sample of cells. Expressed as a per-
centage, S is 0% when a neuron responds
equally to all frames of a movie and 100%
when a neuron responds to only a single frame.
An increase in S indicates an increase in the
sparseness of neural coding across the stimulus
ensemble. Mean sparseness values are 41%,
52%, 61%, and 62% for stimuli one, two, three,
and four times the CRF diameter, respectively.
To quantify sparseness changes in single neu-
rons we computed the ratio of the observed
shift in S to the maximum possible shift as a
function of nCRF stimulation: Sshift ⫽ (SnCRF ⫺
SCRF)/(1 ⫺ SCRF). Average Sshift values are 18%,
32%, and 36% for stimuli two, three, and four
times the CRF diameter, respectively. Neurons
with statistically signiﬁcant (P ⬍ 0.01) shifts
are black and are stacked on top of those with
insigniﬁcant shifts.

Fig. 3. Stimulation of the nCRF decorrelates
responses across the population of neurons in
area V1. (Upper) Distribution of upper limits of
the separation angles between pairs of neurons
tested with similar natural vision movies con-
ﬁned to the CRF. Separation angle is inversely
proportional to the similarity of responses be-
tween randomly selected V1 neurons recorded
in separate sessions [see text and (21) for de-
tails]. The mean separation angle is 51°, indi-
cating substantial response similarity. (Lower)
Distribution of upper limits of the separation
angles between neuron pairs obtained with
natural vision movies four times the CRF diam-
eter, plotted as in (Upper). The mean of this
distribution is 67°, which is signiﬁcantly larger
than the mean of the distribution obtained
from CRF stimulation alone (P ⱕ 0.001). This
increase in separation angle reﬂects decorrela-
tion across the population of V1 responses.

1274

18 FEBRUARY 2000 VOL 287 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org

