 

 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

MEMO 

Brussels, 28 February 2013 

'Smart Borders': for an open and secure Europe 

Why do we need 'smart borders'? 
Travel flows at the external borders of the EU are increasing and are expected to increase 
even more in the future. Border crossings at the air borders alone could increase by 80%, 
from  400  million  in  2009  to  720  million  in  2030.  This  will  result  in  longer  delays  and 
queues for travellers if border checking procedures are not modernised in time. Member 
States cannot address this only by hiring additional border guards and expanding border 
crossing points. The 'Smart Borders' package leads the way towards a next generation of 
border checks relying on new, much more effective technologies. 
The Entry/Exit System  (EES) and the Registered Travellers Programme (RTP) will speed 
up border check procedures for third country nationals entering the EU while at the same 
time enhancing security. 
Meeting  these  two  objectives  of  facilitating  access  and  enhancing  security  would  make 
sure that the EU remains open to the world and attractive as a destination for non EU-
travellers.  

What are the current rules? 
Under the current rules, the Schengen Borders Code requires a thorough check at entry of 
all travellers crossing the external border; there is no flexibility in the system. The same 
checks are applied to all third country nationals, regardless of the level of risk associated 
with them or their frequency of travel.  
Moreover, there are currently no means to record a traveller’s cross-border movements. 
The period of time a traveller has stayed in the Schengen area is calculated based solely 
on the stamps affixed in the travel document. There is no European data base in which 
such  travellers  are  recorded.  As  a  result  there  is  no  effective  way  for  the  relevant 
authorities  to  address  the  issue  of  'overstayers'  (i.e.  travellers  who  stay  beyond  the 
authorised period of time). This lack of information affects the capacity of Member States 
to carry out returns and reduces the extent to which EU border and visa policy is based on 
evidence. 

Registered Traveller Programme 

How will an EU Registered Traveller Programme be working?  

The  Registered  Traveller  Programme  will  facilitate  border  crossings  for  frequent,  pre-
vetted and pre-screened third country travellers at the Schengen external borders.  

MEMO/13/141 

 

The Commission is proposing to make use of new technologies such as Automated Border 
Control systems, thus giving Member States tools to manage their passenger flows more 
efficiently  and  releasing  human  resources  needed  at  the  external  border  for  checking 
higher risk travellers or serve other travellers. Third country nationals having access to the 
RTP would  be able  to  use Automated  Border  Control facilities whenever  available at the 
Schengen border crossing point.  
In  practice  the  RTP  would  work  at  the  border  the  following  way:  A  Registered  Traveller 
would be issued a token in the form of a machine-readable card containing only a unique 
identifier (i.e. application number), which is swiped on arrival and departure at the border 
using an automated gate. The gate would read the token and the travel document (and 
visa sticker number, if applicable) and the fingerprints of the travellers, which would be 
compared to the ones stored in the Central Repository and other databases, including the 
Visa Information system (VIS) for visa holders. If all checks are successful, the traveller is 
able  to  pass  through  the  automated  gate.  In  case  of  any  issue,  the  traveller  would  be 
assisted  by  a  border  guard.  All  in  all,  passing  the  external  border  will  be  a  matter  of 
seconds.  

Who could become a Registered Traveller? 
While citizens from some non-EU countries are required to hold a visa when travelling to 
the Schengen area, others are not1 (see also DG Home infographics). 
Visa  holders  and  non-visa  holders  from  all  third-countries  would  be  eligible  to  apply  for 
access to the RTP and after successful vetting and pre-screening process would be able to 
benefit  from  this  type  of  travel  facilitation  arrangement  at  any  external  border  crossing 
point of the Schengen area. 
Third-country nationals of at least 12 years of age should be able to lodge an application 
for the RTP at the consulate of any Member State or at any external border crossing point. 
Examination  of  applications  would  be  aligned  with  the  criteria  for  issuing  multiple-entry 
visa.  
A  maximum  €20  application  fee  covering  the  administrative  cost  of  handling  RTP 
applications  by  the  Member  States  could  be  asked  to  applicants.  Initial  access  to  the 
Registered Traveller Programme should be granted for one year. 

Entry-Exit System 

How has the Entry/Exit System been designed? 

The Entry/Exit System will permit the accurate and reliable calculation of authorised stays 
as well as identification and verification of travellers. It will do so by replacing the current 
system of calculation based on the stamps in the passports by the electronic registry of 
the dates and place of entry and exit of third-country nationals admitted for short stays. 
The Commission proposal for an EES Regulation foresees to start with the registration of 
alphanumeric data (e.g. names, type and number of travel document(s), date and time of 
entry/exit, etc.) and after three years of operation also biometrics (fingerprints). The data 
retention is foreseen for a period of 6 months in 'ordinary cases' and for 5 years in cases 
of 'overstay'. Access to the database will be granted to authorities responsible for border 
control, issuing visas and authorities competent for verifying the identity of third country 
nationals within the territory of a Member State.  
                                          
1 There are currently 42 countries and entities whose citizens do not need a visa. Further to a recent  
Commission proposal this list could soon include an additional 16 Caribbean and Pacific Island Nations –  
IP/12/1179 

 

2

