DIRECTORS' "WIDER" RESPONSIBILITIES - PROBLEMS 

CONCEPTUAL, PRACTICAL AND PROCEDURAL? 

L. S .  SEALY* 

INTRODUCTION 

This is  a period  of  major change for company law.  The massive output 
of the legislators is ample testimony to this.  Less obviously,  but potentially 
every bit as far-reaching and fundamental, there are stirrings in the case-law 
too, as it slowly becomes apparent that the ancient rules and concepts which 
may have served their purpose well enough when the companies of the 1880s 
brought their disputes before the courts of the 1880s can no longer cope satis- 
factorily,  even with the same problems, a century further on. And of course, 
many of  the  problems  are new  too. 

We have been slow to recognise how different everything has become since 
that  formative  period  a  hundred  years  ago  when  Lord  Lindley  and  his 
brethren  laid  down  the  ground  rules  of  the  company  law  that  we  have 
inherited. The typical company has changed, but our perceived image of the 
notional  company that the law exists to serve has not.  The framework  of 
fundamentals on which  the more detailed rules  of company law are based 
has lost  some key  components; but we have been  slow to adjust.  Have we 
given proper thought to filling the vacuum left by the abolition of ultra vires, 
or to the adequacy of  the "maintenance  of  capital"  principle  to deal  with 
the ubiquitous two-dollar company? Judges (particularly in the wider world 
remote  from  London)  today  come  from  different  backgrounds  and bring 
different experiences to bear in their adjudication of corporate disputes. The 
language of nineteenth-centry  chancery is  imperfectly understood  by most 
lawyers and is inconsistently applied.  Concepts,  procedures,  remedies,  and 
above all,  fact-situations have not remained  static, and we must expect the 
law  to respond. 

I make this state of affairs my excuse to examine the law of directors' duties 
not simply as an analysis of the precedents  appears to show it  but,  rather 
more radically,  as I believe we ought to be beginning to see it.  In so far as 
writing de lege ferenda  allows one to ignore the more ew&mg3demands  of 
traditional  scholarship,  I  make apology in  advance. 

e  y.  .h- 

t Paper delivered at a plenary session of  the A.U.L.S.A.  conference, Monash  University,  25 
August  1987. 
* Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge University; Arthur Robinson and Heddenvicks' Visit- 
ing Professor  in Commercial  Law,  Melbourne  and  Monash  Universities,  1987. 

Directors'  "Wider" Responsibilities 

165 

BACKGROUND 

The pattern  of  the nineteenth-century  company was  so well  settled  that 
its essential  features could be assumed not only by  the judges,  but by  the 
Joint Stock Companies Acts themselves. This "model"  company would have 
corresponded roughly with the middle-sized public company of today, though 
it would have had a markedly different capital structure, fewer institutional 
shareholders and more of the human variety  - interested,  active and vocal 
- and a less professional directorate. In the heyday of laisez-faire,  it would 
unquestionably have been dedicated to the maximisation of profit,  in bank- 
ing, manufacturing,  the railways,  and all the manifestations of the Industri- 
al Revolution. 
Although theseparatepersonajity of the company was a_cknowledg_e_d-Long - 
before it gave immortality to Mr. Salomon in 1897, there is abundant evidence 
'7haTi^i  -the-Vict^ijt%rixfawyer3 eyles -=the company"  was  regarded  as  the 
associated members rather than the legal entity: the company was "they" and 
not "it".  We have,  of course,  left  this way of thinking behind  us long ago. 
It would be hard, anyway, to conceive of the one-person company, the wholly- 
owned subsidiary or many other typical  modern  incorporations  as "they", 
or indeed  as an association of  any kind. 

--- - 

Much of the law handed down to us reflects this Victorian  perception  of 
the company,  in particular  (for present  purposes),  the idea of  the director 
as trustee or agent  for his (or her)  constituents,  the company  in  the sense 
of the collective corporate membership.  It is they who have chosen him, warts 
and all;  they  who can remove  him;  they  who can ratify  his  acts in  excess 
of authority and forgive his sins;  even,  for many decades,  they who could 
dictate to him and his  co-directors how to run  the business.'  His duties  of 
care and skill can properly be assessed  by  subjective criteria,  since he  has 
been  elected  for whatever  qualities  he  has.  And  in  fixing his  duties  to the 
company it is right  to take account of the particular terms of the members' 
social contract (i.e.  the memorandum, including the objects clause, and the 
articles  of  associaton),  since all concerned are party  to it. 

The language of trust,  as Lord Lindley and his predecessors would have 
understood  and  used  it,  was  apt  to  meet  the  claims  of  the  day  against 
delinquent  directors.  One could abuse (or breach)  a "trust"  without  being 
formally constituted a trustee of particular property;  there could be a "fraud" 
on a discretionary power without any imputation of dishonesty;  the use of 
powers  for  an  improper  purpose was  not  a  "bona  fide"  exercise  of  those 
powers,  irrespective  of  any  question  of  motive;  and  one  could  be  held 
accountable  in  equity for  one's  wrongdoing without  bringing  into play  all 
the ramifications of the constructive trust as it is generally understood nowa- 

I See,  e.g.  Companies  Clauses Consolidation  Act  1845, s.90,  and  the judgment  of  Cotton 
L.J.  in Isle of  Wight Rly Co. v.  Tahourdin (1883) 25 Ch.D. 320, 329. The modern approach, 
which regards the board of directors and the general meeting as separate autonomous organs, 
was  first  judicially  recognised  in  Automatic  Self-Cleansing Filter  Syndicate  Co. Ltd.  v. 
Cuninghame  [I9061 2  Ch.  34. 

