Sun, E., Petetz, E., & Baer, U. (eds.) (2007).
The Claims of Literature: The Shoshana Reader.
New York: Fordham University Press.

Feminism
KATIE GARNER & REBECCA MUNFORD

the

Feminism describes
campaigns,
activities, and texts concerned with chal-
lenging and transforming how women are
treated and represented in society. It is a
political movement and discourse that
encompasses a diverse range of perspectives,
theories, and methods. As well as analyzing
patriarchal structures, feminist theory seeks
to propose new ways for women to bring
about social change. This drive underlies
much feminist activity, from public cam-
paigns for new political rights, to the search
for a new “feminine” writing. Current An-
glo-American models often conceptualize
the history of Western feminism in terms
of three movements, or “waves.” The ﬁrst
wave of activity dates from the end of the
eighteenth century through to the beginning
of collective female political action in the
form of the Suffragette and New Women’s
movements in Britain and the US, and the
granting of partial (1918) and full (1928)
franchise for women in Britain. The 1960s
signal the beginnings of the “second wave,”
when women collectively campaigned on a
broad range of issues including sexual health
and contraception, pornography, domestic
and gender discrimination in
abuse,
the workplace. This chapter of
feminist
theory is marked by the emergence of three
different models of feminist politics: liberal
feminism, which focuses on achieving
full equality and opportunities within
existing social structures; radical feminism,
which is revolutionary rather than refor-
mative in its conviction that creating
alternative, woman-centered institutions
and realities will bring
social
change; and socialist feminism, which sees

about

F E M I N I S M 595

“femaleness” and “femininity” as socially
and historically contingent, and is con-
cerned with the economic and cultural con-
texts of women’s oppression. Following the
decline of organized second-wave activities
in the 1980s, different accounts of feminism
from black and Third World women began
to readdress the First World bias of the ﬁrst
and second waves. These differing positions,
alongside developments in the ﬁelds of gen-
der studies, postcolonial theory, queer the-
ory, and postmodernism,
inform third-
wave feminism, which accordingly takes a
more global and plural view of the relation-
ship between power and subjectivity.

The history of feminism does not have a
deﬁnitive origin. As early as the beginning of
the ﬁfteenth century Christine de Pizan was
cataloguing the achievements of women and
challenging female stereotypes in The Book
of the City of Ladies (1983[1404–5]). How-
ever, Mary Wollstonecraft’s A Vindication of
the Rights of Woman (1992[1792]) is often
regarded as heralding the beginning of mod-
ern feminism in Britain. Written in the form
of a philosophical essay, Wollstonecraft’s
provocative call for reform foregrounded
the social, political, and economic margin-
alization of women at a time when the
question of the “rights of man” was being
debated in France and the US. Key to
Wollstonecraft’s argument was her belief
that social structures constructed female
inequality as “natural” and that women
do not choose to behave as they do, but
are instead enslaved by a society that forces
them to behave in certain “sentimental”
ways. In particular, Wollstonecraft identi-
ﬁed gallantry and sensibility as major social
fabrications which had been developed (by
men) to encourage women’s subordination.
The overarching problem,
she argued,
was women’s lack of access to education,
which held them in a “state of perpetual
childhood” (1992[1792]: 11). She proposed
that Enlightenment principles of rational

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

596

F E M I N I S M

thought and the ability to acquire knowl-
edge should be extended to women, and
that, in line with Enlightenment logic, it was
irrational
to exclude women from the
social sphere and to curtail their political
citizenship.

The Vindication had an immediate inter-
national inﬂuence. It was quickly translated
into French and published in three separate
editions in the US. Wollstonecraft’s articu-
lation of femininity as a condition resem-
bling slavery also provided a springboard
from which American women involved in
antislavery campaigns could turn their at-
tention to female suffrage. In the 1840s,
American suffragettes Lucretia Mott and
Elizabeth Cady Stanton jointly campaigned
for the abolishment of slavery and the
granting of suffrage. Stanton’s “Declaration
of Sentiments,” which imitated the Ameri-
can Declaration of Independence (1776),
extending the equal rights doctrine to in-
clude women, was issued at the Seneca Falls
women’s rights convention in July 1848. In
1869 Stanton founded the National Woman
Suffrage Association (NWSA) with Susan B.
Anthony, whose roots were also in antislav-
ery activities. The NWSA merged with the
American Woman Suffrage Association
(AWSA) to form the National American
Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA)
in 1890. The NAWSA played a vital role
in ratifying the Nineteenth Amendment,
also known as the Susan B. Anthony amend-
ment, which granted American women full
suffrage in 1920.

In Britain, in the second half of the nine-
teenth century, debates about women’s lack
of access to education expanded into a wider
questioning of women’s political inequality,
and the terms “feminism” and “feminist”
entered public usage by the 1890s. The
British philosophers and political theorists
John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor devel-
oped aspects of Wollstonecraft’s liberal fem-
inist thought, campaigning for women’s

suffrage and equal access to education.
“The subjection of women” (1869), which
Mill worked on with his wife, was published
three years after he ﬁrst introduced a par-
liamentary bill calling for the extension of
enfranchisement to women. The essay ar-
gued that all women were repressed citizens.
It also blamed British marriage laws – which
denied women their own rights to children,
land, and property – for producing and
sustaining inequality between men and
women. Although “The subjection” is rec-
ognized as a progressive feminist text in its
call for gender equality, Mill’s stance has
been criticized for its refusal to question
women’s position in the domestic sphere.
By the latter part of the nineteenth cen-
tury, underground female discontent had
begun to translate into more radical, public
statements and women formed a number of
activist groups. Incorporating both the lob-
bying strategies of the National Union of
Women’s Suffrage Societies (NUWSS), led
by Millicent Fawcett, and the direct action of
the Women’s Social and Political Union
(WSPU), founded by Emmeline Pankhurst
and her daughters,
the British suffrage
movement represented a demand for equal-
ity, grounded in political and legislative
reform. The passing of the 1928 Represen-
tation of the People Act marked the culmi-
nation of over six decades of political and
social agitation, and extended the partial
suffrage that women had received ten years
previously in 1918. The same decades
marked a period of literary experimentation
and innovation, with writers such as Virgi-
nia Woolf, H. D., Edith Wharton, Zola
Neale Hurston, and Djuna Barnes subject-
ing the relationship between women and
literature, and gender and language, to
new focuses. The most inﬂuential of these
was Woolf’s A Room of One’s Own (1929).
Developed from two lectures that Woolf
had delivered to women students at Newn-
ham and Girton Colleges in Cambridge in

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

