R E V I E W S

Organization and segregation of 
bacterial chromosomes

Xindan Wang*, Paula Montero Llopis* and David Z. Rudner

Abstract | The bacterial chromosome must be compacted more than 1,000‑fold to fit into the 
compartment in which it resides. How it is condensed, organized and ultimately segregated 
has been a puzzle for over half a century. Recent advances in live‑cell imaging and 
genome‑scale analyses have led to new insights into these problems. We argue that the key 
feature of compaction is the orderly folding of DNA along adjacent segments and that this 
organization provides easy and efficient access for protein–DNA transactions and has a 
central role in driving segregation. Similar principles and common proteins are used in 
eukaryotes to condense and to resolve sister chromatids at metaphase.

DNA transactions
Processes in the cell that act 
on DNA: for example, 
transcription, replication, 
recombination and repair.

Plectonemic loops
Also known as interwound 
loops, these are loops of DNA 
that are twisted together as a 
result of under- or over-winding 
the DNA duplex.

Harvard Medical School, 
Department of Microbiology 
and Immunobiology,  
HIM 1025, 77 Avenue Louis 
Pasteur, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.
*These authors contributed 
equally to this work.
Correspondence to D.Z.R. 
e-mail:  
rudner@hms.harvard.edu
doi:10.1038/nrg3375
Published online  
12 February 2013

The visualization and characterization of the genetic 
material in bacteria has had a bumpy and controversial 
history. In eukaryotes, the orderly segregation of sister 
chromatids in mitosis was described in awe-inspiring 
detail in the 1880s1; by contrast, the bacterial chromo-
some, which tends to stain uniformly with basic dyes, 
was for many years believed to be unstructured. It was 
not until the 1930s that light microscopists using DNA 
dyes with acid-treated cells convincingly demonstrated 
that the bacterial chromosome was concentrated in 
discrete bodies with soft irregular outlines2,3 (FIG. 1A). 
These images changed the view of the bacterial chro-
mosome from a formless material to a defined structure 
that hinted at orderly and predictable behaviour4. These 
cloud-like nuclear bodies were named nucleoids.

Cryoelectron microscopy of vitreous sections of 
nucleoids revealed structures with features similar to 
those observed using DNA dyes (FIG. 1B) and showed 
irregular and dispersed morphologies that occupy about 
half of the intracellular space. Two striking features of 
these images were the presence of many coral-like projec-
tions that extended into the cytoplasm and the exclusion 
of the ribosomes from the nucleoid4. Similar compart-
mentalization has since been observed using fluores-
cence microscopy5 (FIG. 1C). These images still provoke 
our thinking about the bacterial chromosome. We envi-
sion a dynamic DNA surface that interacts with proteins 
in the cytoplasm. Although proteins can penetrate into 
and reside within the interior of the nucleoid, most DNA 
transactions are thought to occur at its periphery.

In the early 1970s, Pettijohn and colleagues6–9 devel-
oped methods to lyse Escherichia coli gently and to obtain 
nucleoids for direct electron microscopy visualization, 

providing an enduring image of the bacterial chromo-
some as a collection of plectonemic loops (that is, inter-
wound loops) emanating from a dense core (FIG. 1D) that 
is suggested to be organized by proteins and RNA6–8,10. 
The composition, organization and function (and even 
existence) of the core remain important and outstanding 
issues in the field. These studies led to the rosette model 
of the bacterial chromosome in which interwound loops 
are organized by a nucleoid scaffold (FIGS 1D,2a), creating 
a structure that resembles a bottlebrush. However, the 
molecular nature of this compact aggregate of DNA, its 
cellular localization and organization, and its local and 
global dynamics in living bacteria remained elusive.

Various technical advances (BOX 1) are providing 
new and exciting insights into bacterial chromosome 
organization and dynamics. These include fluorescence-
microscopy-based live-cell imaging to track multiple 
chromosomal loci in real time during cell division cycles, 
along with the development of genome-wide molecular 
and analytical approaches to study the conformations of 
chromosomes and the patterns of chromosome-associ-
ated proteins. In this Review, we draw on these recent 
studies to discuss our current understanding of two prob-
lems: how the chromosome is organized and compacted 
in the bacterial cell and how the replicated chromosomes 
are disentangled and segregated. We discuss these topics 
separately but, as you will see, they are intimately con-
nected. Our guiding premise is that the orderly folding 
of the chromosome, which occurs along adjacent DNA 
segments (called lengthwise condensation) in lockstep 
(that is, in synchrony) with its replication, generates its 
higher-order organization and functions as the driving 
force for bulk chromosome segregation. Throughout, 

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 

 VOLUME 14 | MARCH 2013 | 191

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

A

Ba

Bb

D

Ca  Nucleoid

Cb  Ribosomes  Cc  Overlay 

Figure 1 | The bacterial nucleoid.  A | Bacillus subtilis nucleoid stained with Giemsa using acid‑treated cells.  
Nature Reviews | Genetics
B | The nucleoid of growing Escherichia coli in thin section after cryofixation followed by freeze substitution. Panels a 
and b show the same section; in the panel b, the ribosome‑free spaces were enhanced by colouring by hand.  
C | Nucleoid (a; stained with 4′,6‑diamidino‑2‑phenylindole (DAPI), coloured red) and ribosomes (b; labelled with 
RplA–GFP, coloured green) in live B. subtilis cells growing in rich media. Part c shows the overlay of the two images. 
Despite this commonly depicted cloud‑like appearance of the bacterial chromosome, the morphology of the nucleoid 
varies among bacteria and is influenced by growth rate and environmental conditions. For example, the nucleoid in 
Caulobacter crescentus, and in slow‑growing E. coli and B. subtilis, appears to be more diffuse and occupies a greater 
proportion of the cell cytoplasm (not shown). D | A gently isolated E. coli nucleoid bound by cytochrome C, spread on 
an electron microscope grid, stained with uranyl acetate and visualized by transmission electron microscopy. The 
length of E. coli and B. subtilis cells is 2–5 μm, whereas the nucleoid in panel D is approximately 20 μm in length. Parts A 
and B are reproduced, with permission, from REF. 4 © (1994) American Society of Microbiology. Part D is reproduced, 
with permission, from © Designergenes Posters Ltd; in memory of Dr Ruth Kavenoff 1944–1999.

we highlight which principles and molecular mecha-
nisms are shared with eukaryotes and which aspects are  
specific to the chromosomal dynamics of bacteria.

Chromosome compaction and organization
Most bacteria contain a single circular chromosome 
of 2–8 Mb in size that replicates bidirectionally from a 
unique origin (oriC). If stretched out, this DNA molecule 
would be >1 mm in length, whereas the space occupied 
by the nucleoid is <1 μm in diameter. Accordingly, the 
chromosome must be linearly compacted more than 
1,000-fold to fit inside the bacterial cell11,12. The DNA is 
condensed in an orderly and hierarchical fashion, and 
we describe this compaction and organization from its 
smallest unit to its largest domain.

Topological domains. The principal mechanism by 
which the bacterial chromosome is compacted is  
by negative DNA supercoiling. This under-winding 

of the DNA duplex generates plectonemic loops and 
branches like the ones observed by electron micros-
copy in the nucleoid spreads. Supercoiling condenses 
the chromosome, but it also draws DNA in on itself, 
pulling it away from non-contiguous DNA (such as 
replicated sister DNA). Unlike plasmids, which can be 
relaxed by one single-strand break, numerous nicks are 
required to relax the chromosome completely, suggest-
ing that chromosomal DNA is organized into super-
coiled domains that are topologically insulated from 
each other8. Elegant molecular experiments that exploit 
supercoiling-sensitive activities (such as transcription 
and recombination) suggest that independent topologi-
cal domains vary in size but are on average 10 kb13–15. 
Thus, a 4 Mb genome would have approximately 400 
topologically isolated domains. In the context of the 
highly schematized bottlebrush model for the nucleoid, 
these domains are the branched plectonemic loops that 
make up the bristles (FIGS 1D,2a). Although this model 

192 | MARCH 2013 | VOLUME 14 

 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

