Cognitive Science 32 (2008) 685–712
Copyright C(cid:1) 2008 Cognitive Science Society, Inc. All rights reserved.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online
DOI: 10.1080/03640210802066865

Processing Polarity: How the Ungrammatical

Intrudes on the Grammatical

Shravan Vasishtha, Sven Br¨ussowb, Richard L. Lewisc, Heiner Drenhausa

aInstitute for Linguistics, University of Potsdam

bDepartment of Psychology, University of Heidelberg
cDepartment of Psychology, University of Michigan

Received 13 November 2006; received in revised form 14 July 2007; accepted 14 July 2007

Abstract

A central question in online human sentence comprehension is, “How are linguistic relations estab-
lished between different parts of a sentence?” Previous work has shown that this dependency resolution
process can be computationally expensive, but the underlying reasons for this are still unclear. This
article argues that dependency resolution is mediated by cue-based retrieval, constrained by indepen-
dently motivated working memory principles deﬁned in a cognitive architecture. To demonstrate this,
this article investigates an unusual instance of dependency resolution, the processing of negative and
positive polarity items, and conﬁrms a surprising prediction of the cue-based retrieval model: Partial-
cue matches—which constitute a kind of similarity-based interference—can give rise to the intrusion
of ungrammatical retrieval candidates, leading to both processing slow-downs and even errors of judg-
ment that take the form of illusions of grammaticality in patently ungrammatical structures. A notable
achievement is that good quantitative ﬁts are achieved without adjusting the key model parameters.

Keywords: Computational modeling; ACT–R; Eye tracking; Reading; Sentence processing

1. Introduction

The act of comprehending a sentence triggers a complex set of rapid cognitive processes
that engage multiple memory systems. Minimally, contact must be made with a long-term
lexical memory, novel compositional structures incrementally created and maintained in a
working memory, local and global ambiguities resolved at multiple levels of linguistic repre-
sentation, and an interpretation of the sentence constructed that is integrated into a referential
representation of the current discourse. A key process during all this is the integration of in-
coming lexical elements with the partial sentence-level structure built so far. Such integrations

Correspondence should be sent to Shravan Vasishth, Institute for Linguistics, University of Potsdam, Postfach

601553, D–14415, Potsdam, Germany. E-mail: vasishth@acm.org

686

S. Vasishth et al./Cognitive Science 32 (2008)

are not instantaneous or cost free, and many different theories have been proposed to explain
their psychological properties. The ultimate goal of these theories is to provide insight into
the fundamental properties of the linguistic working memory systems that support the rich
combinatorial capacity of human language.

For example, in syntactic ambiguity resolution, the motivation behind principles like min-
imal attachment and late closure is that they serve to systematically reduce the parser’s
working memory load (Frazier, 1979, p. 39). In fact, the costs of incremental integration can
be characterized independently of classic ambiguity problems. Incremental integrations are
necessary to create grammatically licensed linguistic relations, or dependencies. Dependen-
cies are a pervasive property of language: Linguistic elements such as noun-phrase arguments
depend on verbs, pronouns and reﬂexives depend on antecedents, gaps depend on their ﬁllers.
These dependencies must be resolved in order to build an interpretation of an event, or to
resolve reference of pronominal and null elements. Here, a central question of interest is,
“How are dependents integrated with each other?” Answering this question is fundamental to
understanding the nature of working memory in human sentence comprehension.

Chomsky (1965, pp. 13–14) was among the ﬁrst to propose that the reduced acceptability
of sentences containing a “nesting of a long and complex element” arises from “decay of
memory.” In related work, Just and Carpenter (1980, 1992) directly addressed dependency
resolution in sentence comprehension in terms of memory retrieval (similar early approaches
are the production–system-based models of Anderson, Kline, & Lewis, 1977). Just and Car-
penter developed a model of integration that involved activation decay (as a side-effect of
capacity limitations) as a key determinant of processing difﬁculty. For example, under the
rubric of distance effects, they described the constraints on dependency resolution as follows:
“The greater the distance between the two constituents to be related, the larger the probability
of error and the longer the duration of the integration process” (1992, p. 133).

The activation decay idea as a determinant of dependency resolution difﬁculty was taken a
great deal further in the Syntactic Prediction Locality Theory (SPLT; for a historical overview
of the connection between decay and distance, see Gibson, 1998, p. 9) and, more recently, the
Dependency Locality Theory (DLT; Gibson, 2000). The DLT proposes (among other things)
that the cognitive cost of assembling a dependent with a head is partly a function of the
number of new intervening discourse referents that were introduced between them. Another
related theory is Early Immediate Constituents (EIC; Hawkins, 1994), which assigns a greater
processing cost when there is an increase in the number of words that make up a syntactic
constituent. The SPLT and DLT, in particular, have yielded a rich body of experimental
research that provides strong support for the existence of distance effects in English (e.g.,
Gibson & Thomas, 1999; Grodner & Gibson, 2005; Warren & Gibson, 2005).

In recent work, another approach to the dependency resolution issue has been proposed
(Lewis & Vasishth, 2005; Lewis, Vasishth, & Van Dyke, 2006; Van Dyke & Lewis, 2003;
Vasishth & Lewis, 2006). This theory differs from previous accounts in that instead of deﬁning
constraints on retrieval in terms of linguistic primitives such as the number of intervening new
discourse referents (DLT) or the number of words per constituent (EIC), the cognitive costs
of dependency resolution are derived from an independently motivated theory of working
memory retrieval: Dependents are retrieved through a content-based retrieval process that
relies on cues expressed as feature-value speciﬁcations, and retrieval difﬁculty emerges from

