 
 
 
 
  

  
Questions: 

APPENDIX 

Migrant Organizations 

1.  Read the example of the Association of the Yazidis. What is your first impression on the 

work of the association? How is their offer composed? Who does it address?  

2.  How  is  the  organisation  incorporated  into  the  social  structure  of  the  city?  How  is  it 
interconnected  with  other  actors,  organisations?  Is  the  association  supported  or 
promoted through any means by other actors? 

3.  Can the Forum be seen as an important agent in negotiating the production of the city ? 

In which way? How does the Forum contribute to it? 

 
 
The Association of the Yazidi  ( Forum ) – Oldenburg 
  
The Association of the Yazidi in Oldenburg was founded in 1993. Its aim is to maintain and to 
transmit  religious  and  cultural  habits  as  well  as  values  and  traditions  of  the  Yazidi  form  of 
society  (social  system)  among  the  diaspora.  The  character  of  the  Yazidi  lifestyle,  in  both 
ideological  and  traditional  way/sense,  is  to  be  maintained  considering  the  conditions  of  the 
enlightened modern society in Western Europe. The Yazidi shall be given a chance to continue 
and increase their culture in a peaceful way. The association does community service to bring 
together  people  who  left  their  home  and  builds  bridges  between  the  German  society  and 
migrants of Kurdish origin. The association also provides support in different life situations and 
problem areas, working in different fields.  
  
Working fields (as described by the association): 
 
Social work 
The  Yazidi  in  Germany  are facing  a  society  with  different  values,  norms and  habits.  They  are 
exposed  to  continuous  culture-related  conflicts  and  therefore  tend  to  be  more  susceptible  to 
psychosomatic disorders. Due to these psycho-social difficulties, a minority-specific treatment is 
required. The association of the Yazidi in Oldenburg has the necessary cultural background and 
understanding for this. 
 
Intercultural meetings 
Many people talk about integration and actually refer to assimilation. A lot of people talk about a 
multicultural society within the frame of their own definition of the concept  of culture and don’t 
ask the affected people what they think about it. We (the Yazidi Association) think: multicultural 
society means the cohabitation of different cultures. Thus, the Forum is in favor of a multicultural 

society  and  sees  the  promoting  of  intercultural  meetings  as  an  important  duty  of  its  own  - 
supporting  meetings  especially  between  the  Yazidi  and  Germans.  Because  only  the  cultures 
that  are  lived,  can  exchange  ideas.  This  exchange  is  important  for  the  harmonization  and 
revitalization of the society, but is also important because the cultural exchange helps to break 
down  prejudices  and  thus  combat  a  cause  of  xenophobia.  In  this  regard,  the  association 
organizes  intercultural  encounters,  participates  through  numerous  contributions  in  the  cultural 
life  of  Oldenburg  and  is,  in  cooperation  with  other  social  and  urban  organizations,  active  in 
promoting equality and the coexistence of foreigners and Germans marked by mutual tolerance.   
 
Youth (welfare) work 
A  high  priority  represents  the  support  and  counselling  of  the  Yazidi  youth.  Many  Yazidi 
adolescents feel left alone with their problems. They find themselves in a tense atmosphere of 
two  cultures  and  have  identity  problems. These  are  problems  that  do  not  occur  among  native 
adolescents.With its work in this field, the cultural forum makes an important contribution to the 
youth work in Oldenburg. Thus, the inclusion of young people will be encouraged and important 
social values such as tolerance and humanity will be taught. The cultural forum is a recognized 
provider of private youth services and is a member of the Stadtjugendring*.  
 
*Many  youth  associations  joined  together  and  formed  the  umbrella  organisation  named 
Stadtjugendring (“circle of youth of the city”). Their common goal is to support and promote the 
young generation of Oldenburg. The incorporated association forms a strong community and it 
also serves as a representation towards politics and administration. In addition, it operates the 
House of Youth as a joint institution, working on projects, providing services and always striving 
to improve the youth work in Oldenburg. 
     
Women (welfare) work 
For the special protection of the interests of women, the association named a representative of 
the women-workgroup. The special problems of migrant women (eg. lack of integration) should 
be repealed by minority-specific care.  
 
Refugee social work 
The refugees lose their social environment they had in their homeland, and the development of 
new social contacts  in Germany proves to be very difficult. The Forum counsels refugees and 
provides support and orientation in dealing with authorities and other institutions.  
 
Voluntary work for the elderly 
The german proverb “an ancient tree can not be planted elsewhere” is valid for the older Yazidi 
generation.  The  change  from  a  traditional  society  to  an  industrial  environment  creates, 
especially for this group, major mental and physical conflicts. Since this group is largely cut off 
from the labor process, the integration takes place only with great difficulty. Though it was easy 
to  establish  contacts  with  like-minded  in  the  home  village,  this  proves  to  be  a  problem  in 
Germany  because  of  greater  distances.  Thus,  to  avoid  loneliness,  it  is  very  important  to 
organize meeting places for the older generation. 
 

