 
 
 
 

The Leverage Ratchet Effect 

Anat R. Admati 
Peter M. DeMarzo  
Martin F. Hellwig  
Paul Pfleiderer* 

 

July 31, 2013 

This version: December 2, 2013 

 

 

 

 
 

                                                 
*Admati, DeMarzo and Pfleiderer are from the Graduate School of Business, Stanford University; Hellwig is from 
the Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods, Bonn. A previous version of this paper was circulated in 
March, 2012 with the title: “Debt Overhang and Capital Regulation.” We are grateful to Jules van Binsbergen, Rebel 
Cole, Doug Diamond, Christoph Engel, Oliver Hart, Gérard Hertig, Oliver Himmler,  Alexander Morell, Michael 
Roberts, Mark Roe, Steve Ross, David Skeel, Chester Spatt, Ilya Strebulaev, Jeff Zwiebel, and seminar participants 
in INET 2012 Annual Conference, Said School of Business, 2012 Law & Banking/Finance Conference at NYU, 
NBER  conference  on  Understanding  the  Capital  Structures  of  Non-Financial  and  Financial  Corporations,  and 
Vienna Graduate School of Finance for useful discussions and comments. Contact information: 
 

admati@stanford.edu; demarzo_peter@gsb.stanford.edu; hellwig@coll.mpg.de; pfleider@stanford.edu. 

 

The Leverage Ratchet Effect 

Abstract 

Shareholder-creditor conflicts can create leverage ratchet effects, resulting in inefficient 
capital  structures.  Once  debt  is  in  place,  shareholders  may  inefficiently  increase  leverage  but 
avoid reducing it no matter how beneficial leverage reduction might be to total firm value.  

We  present  conditions  for  an  irrelevance  result  under  which  shareholders  view  asset 
sales, pure recapitalization and asset expansion with new equity as equally undesirable. We then 
analyze  how  seniority,  asset  heterogeneity,  and  asymmetric  information  affect  shareholders’ 
choice of leverage-reduction method.  

Our results are particularly relevant to banking and highlight the benefit and importance 

of capital regulation to constrain inefficient excessive borrowing.  

.  

 

