Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Translocated effectors of Yersinia
Hiroyuki Matsumoto and Glenn M Young

Currently, all known translocated effectors of Yersinia are
delivered into host cells by type III secretion systems
(T3SSs). Pathogenic Yersinia maintain the plasmid-encoded
Ysc T3SS for the speciﬁc delivery of the well-studied Yop
effectors. New horizons for effector biology have opened with
the discovery of the Ysps of Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B, which
are translocated into host cells by the chromosome-endoded
Ysa T3SS. The reported arsenal of effectors is likely to expand
since genomic analysis has revealed gene-clusters in some
Yersinia that code for other T3SSs. These efforts also revealed
possible type VI secretion (T6S) systems, which may
indicate that translocation of effectors occurs by multiple
mechanisms.

Address
Department of Food Science and Technology, Robert Mondavi South
Laboratory Building, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue,
Davis, CA 95616, USA

Corresponding author: Matsumoto, Hiroyuki (hmatsumoto@ucdavis.edu)
and Young, Glenn M (gmyoung@ucdavis.edu)

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

This review comes from a themed issue on
Host-microbe interactions: bacteria
Edited by Brendan Kenny and Raphael Valdivia

1369-5274/$ – see front matter
# 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI 10.1016/j.mib.2008.12.005

Introduction
The genus Yersinia includes three human pathogens.
The most infamous is the black death agent Y. pestis,
which causes bubonic plague when it is transmitted by
the bite of a ﬂea and pneumonic plague when it is
acquired through aerosol transmission [1]. By contrast,
Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis are enteropatho-
gens transmitted by consumption of contaminated food
or water [2]. These two organisms cause gastrointestinal
syndromes that can develop into fatal septicemia in
patients with compromised or underdeveloped immune
systems. Regardless of the species and type of disease
that ensues, translocation of toxic virulence effectors into
host cells by type III secretion (T3S) systems plays an
essential role in determining the outcome of a Yersinia
infection. There are two recognized groups of effector
proteins delivered by T3SSs among the Yersinia; the Yops
and the Ysps.

Yop effectors and the innate immune
response
Interestingly, despite the various modes of transmission
and diseases caused by the pathogenic Yersinia, they
commonly have the plasmid-encoded Ysc T3SS for the
delivery of six Yop effectors (YopE, YopH, YpkA/YopO,
YopM, YopJ/P, and YopT) (Table 1). Efforts to determine
the biochemical activities of the Yops have revealed that
many targets are cellular components that inﬂuence the
host innate immune response (Figure 1). This arm of the
immune system serves as the front line of defense against
an invasive pathogen [3]. Macrophages and neutrophils
are important elements of the early innate immune
response and serve as sentries that take up and then
inactivate invading bacteria. These cells, which act along
with other facets of the innate immune response, are
induced following the recognition of pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPS) by the family of pattern-
recognition receptors (PRRs) located on a variety of cell
types. In response to PRR agonists or PAMPS, such as
LPS or ﬂagellin, signals are transduced and converged to
activate multiple MAPKs and the NF-kB signaling path-
ways. This inﬂammatory response in turn leads to the
production of numerous proinﬂammatory cytokines, in-
cluding TNF-a, IL-12 and IL-18.

Given the important role that the MAPKs and NF-kB
signaling pathways play in the earliest stages of the
immune response, it is not surprising that one strategy
of pathogenic Yersinia is to interfere with these essential
signaling components [4–6]. It is well established that
YopJ/P is a potent inhibitor of multiple MAPK and NF-
kB pathways [7]. Recent studies have clariﬁed the bio-
chemical nature of YopJ/P activity by revealing that it is
an enzyme that acetylates serine and threonine residues
in the activation loop of MKKs and IKKs [8,9,10].
This modiﬁcation effectively blocks the residues from
being phosphorylated and results in an inhibition of their
activation thereby affecting cytokine production and
inducing apoptosis of macrophages.

Phagocytosis of bacteria requires reorganization of the
actin cytoskeleton through a process that is regulated by
Rho family GTPases [11]. YopE is a Rho GTPase-acti-
vating protein (RhoGAP) that has been shown to stimu-
late GTP hydrolysis,
thereby interfering with actin
depolymerization mediated by the Rho family of proteins
[12,13]. In addition to GTPase activation, it has been
shown that membrane anchoring is also required for the
activation of RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42. Membrane anchor-
ing occurs as the result of a post-translational modiﬁcation
resulting in C-terminal prenylation at a cysteine residue.

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

www.sciencedirect.com

Translocated effectors of Yersinia Matsumoto and Young 95

Table 1

Virulence effector proteins of pathogenic Yersinia.

Effectors

T3SS

Gene locations

Biochemical

Cellular targets

Cellular effects

functions/characteristics

Pathogenic Y. pestis, Y. psuedotuberculosis, and Y. enterocolitica
YopE

Ysc/Ysa Plasmid

Rho GAP mimicry

RhoA, Rac1, Cdc42

YopH

Ysc

Plasmid

Protein tyrosine phosphatase Focal adhesion complexes

(p130Cas, FAK, paxillin,
Fyb, SKAP-HOM, Crk, Pyk2)
Other proteins LAT, SLP-76,
Lck

YpkA/YopO Ysc

Plasmid

Serine/threonine kinase

Gaq, RhoA, Rac1 Actin
(kinase activity activation)

RhoGDI mimicry
Actin binding

YopM

Ysc

Plasmid

Localization to nucleus

Rsk1 and Prk2?

Twelve to twenty tandem
leucine-rich repeats
(20 amino-acid)

YopJ/P

Ysc/Ysa Plasmid

Serine/threonine
Acetyltransferase

MAPKK and IKK family
member proteins

YopT

Ysc

Plasmid

Cysteine protease

RhoA, Rac1, Cdc42

Disruption of actin cytoskeleton
Inhibition of phagocytosis

Disruption of actin cytoskeleton
Disruption of phagocytosis

Inhibition of chemoattractant protein
(MCP1) production (P13K/Akt signaling)
Suppression of adaptive immune
response (cytokine IL-2)

Disruption of actin cytoskeleton

Disruption of phagocytosis
Inhibition of Gaq signaling

Inhibition of cytokine production
(IL-15 and IL-15Ra)
Depletion of NK cells

Inhibition of MAPK and NF-kB signaling
pathways
Suppression of proinﬂammatory cytokine
and chemokine production (TNF-a, IL-8,
IL-12, IL-18, etc.)
Induction of apoptosis

Disruption of actin cytoskeleton
Inhibition of phagocytosis

?
?

?
?
?

Highly pathogenic Y. enterocolitica Biovar 1B
YspA
YspL

Chromosome
Chromosome

Ysa
Ysa

Chromosome
Chromosome
Chromosome

Chromosome

YspP
YspF
YspE

YspI

YspK

YspM

Ysa
Ysa
Ysa

Ysa

Ysa

Ysa

?
?

?
Two separate 15 or 17
amino-acid repeats
Protein tyrosine phosphatase ?
?
?
ADP-ribosyltransferase?
?

Ca2+-binding protein
Three tandem 12 amino-acid
repeats

Chromosome

Serine/threonine kinase

Chromosome

GDSL lipase motif

E2 ubiquitin-conjugating
enzymes
?

Inhibition of NF-kB signaling pathway

Growth inhibition of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae

YopT acts as a cysteine protease that removes this lipid
modiﬁcation through cleavage at a site a few residues
upstream of the prenylated cysteine [14,15]. The result-
ing mislocalization inhibits normal signaling function
[13,16].

Rho family members are further controlled by Rho gua-
nine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors
(RhoGDI).
RhoGDI binds and sequesters inactive GDP-bound
Rho family members primarily in the cytoplasm. YpkA/
YopO contains a C-terminal domain that interacts with
RhoA and Rac1 to mimic RhoGDI thereby preventing
nucleotide exchange and activation [17]. Interestingly,

YpkA/YopO also has an N-terminally located serine/
threonine kinase domain that is activated by host cell
derived actin, but its substrate remained a mystery for
many years [18]. Importantly, a group of G proteins that
respond to G protein coupled receptors have emerged as
the YpkA/YopO kinase targets [19]. In a recent elegant
study, it was demonstrated that YpkA/YopO speciﬁcally
phosphorylates Ser47 of Gaq, a key residue located in the
highly conserved diphosphate-binding loop of
the
GTPase fold [19]. This phosphorylation impairs nucleo-
tide binding and prevents Gaq-mediated cellular pro-
cesses, including the subsequent activation of RhoA that
would be expected to limit bacterial phagocytosis by cells.

www.sciencedirect.com

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2009, 12:94–100

