 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTERNATIONAL REVIEW, 2006, 

55

 (3), 303–332

553Original Article
IMMIGRANT YOUTH
BERRY ET AL.
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Oxford, UK
APPSApplied Psychology: an International
0269-994X
© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2006
xxx 2006

Immigrant Youth: Acculturation, Identity, 

and Adaptation

John W. Berry*

Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada 

Jean S. Phinney

California State University, Los Angeles, California, USA 

David L. Sam

University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway 

Paul Vedder

Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands 

C
et  article  présente  plusieurs  des  principaux  résultats  d’une  grande  étude
internationale sur l’acculturation et l’adaptation de jeunes immigrés (âgés de
13 à 18 ans) qui se sont implantés dans treize pays (
 = 5,366); il y est adjoint
 = 2,631).  La  recherche  s’appuyait  sur
un  échantillon  de  jeunes  nationaux  (

N

N

* Address for correspondence: John W. Berry, Department of Psychology, Queen’s Univer-

sity, Kingston, Ontario, Canada, K7L 3N6. Email: berryj@king.igs.net

The  ﬁndings  reported  in  this  paper  come  from  the  International  Comparative  Study  of
Ethnocultural Youth (ICSEY), carried out in 13 countries. Members of the project group are
(in alphabetical order of countries) C. Leung, R. Pe-Pua, R. Rooney, & D. Sang (Australia):
J.W.  Berry  &  K.  Kwak  (Canada);  K.  Liebkind  (Finland);  C.  Sabatier  (France);  P.  Schmitz
(Germany); G. Horenczyk (Israel); P. Vedder & F. van de Vijver (The Netherlands); C. Ward
(New Zealand); D.L. Sam (Norway); F. Neto (Portugal); E. Virta & C. Westin (Sweden);
L. Robinson (United Kingdom) and J.S. Phinney (United States). Members of the team con-
tributed to various aspects of the study, including its conceptualization, the development of
the instrument, and the collection of data in their respective countries.

An account of the ICSEY study can be found in J.W. Berry, J.S. Phinney, D.L. Sam, &
P. Vedder (Eds.) (2006). 
Immigrant youth in cultural transition: Acculturation, identity and adap-
tation across national contexts
. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Co-authors
of chapters in this book are (in alphabetical order): J.W. Berry, G. Horenczyk, K. Kwak,
K. Liebkind, J.S. Phinney, R. Rooney, D.L. Sam, D. Sang, F.J.R. van de Vijver, P. Vedder,
E. Virta, C. Ward, and C. Westin.

Other  papers  based  on  the  project  are  listed  on  the  project  website  http://www.ceifo.su.se/

icsey/icsey.html

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ,
UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

304

BERRY ET AL.

trois questions centrales: comment les jeunes migrants gèrent-ils le processus
d’acculturation? Comment parviennent-ils à s’adapter? Et y a-t-il un lien manifeste
entre la forme d’acculturation et le succès de l’adaptation? L’analyse en clusters
déboucha sur quatre profils d’acculturation: intégrateur, ethnique, national et diffus.
L’analyse factorielle de cinq variables d’adaptation mit en évidence deux types
d’adaptation: psychologique et socioculturel. Il existe une forte relation entre la
façon dont les jeunes s’acculturent et leur adaptation: ceux qui présentent un profil
intégrateur bénéficient des meilleurs indicateurs d’adaptations psychologique
et socioculturelle alors que ceux souffrant d’un profil diffus ont les pires. Entre les
deux, le profil ethnique présente une adaptation psychologique relativement bonne
et une adaptation socioculturelle plutôt pauvre, tandis que le profil national a une
adaptation psychologique relativement pauvre et une adaptation socioculturelle
légèrement négative. Cette configuration de résultats fut en grande partie retrouvée
à  travers  une  modélisation  en  équation  structurelle.  Les  conséquences  pour
l’implantation des jeunes immigrés sont claires: ils devraient être encouragés à
préserver  l’appartenance  à  leur  culture  d’origine  tout  en  établissant  des  liens
étroits avec la société d’accueil.

N

N

how

, 

ethnic

, 

diffuse

national

,  and 

how well

how

 they acculturate and 

  =  2,631).  The  study  was  guided  by  three  core  questions: 

This paper reports some of the main ﬁndings from a large international study
of the acculturation and adaptation of immigrant youth (aged 13 to 18 years)
  =  5,366),  as  well  as  a  sample  of  national
who  are  settled  in  13  societies  (
youth  (
  do
 do they adapt;
immigrant youth deal with the process of acculturation; 
and are there important relationships between 
how
 they adapt? Cluster analysis produced four distinct acculturation proﬁles:
well
.  Factor  analysis  of  ﬁve  adaptation
integration
socio-
variables  revealed  two  distinct  forms  of  adaptation: 
cultural
. There were substantial relationships between how youth acculturate
and how well they adapt: those with an integration proﬁle had the best psy-
chological and sociocultural adaptation outcomes, while those with a diffuse
proﬁle had the worst; in between, those with an ethnic proﬁle had moderately
good psychological adaptation but poorer sociocultural adaptation, while those
with  a  national  proﬁle  had  moderately  poor  psychological  adaptation,  and
slightly negative sociocultural adaptation. This pattern of results was largely
replicated using structural equation modeling. Implications for the settlement
of  immigrant  youth  are  clear:  youth  should  be  encouraged  to  retain  both  a
sense of their own heritage cultural identity, while establishing close ties with
the larger national society.

psychological

  and 

INTRODUCTION

Immigration is a world-wide phenomenon, involving many millions of people
and  most  countries  (UN  Population  Report,  2002).  It  has  been  portrayed
as  both  a  source  of  problems  and  as  an  opportunity  for  individuals  and
societies  (Baubock,  Heller,  &  Zolberg,  1996).  Psychology,  in  addition  to
other social science disciplines, has begun to contribute to an understanding
of those factors that contribute to making the process a positive, rather than
a negative, factor in personal and societal development (Berry, 2001). Two
consequences of immigration are the experience of acculturation by groups

©  2006  The  Authors.  Journal  compilation  ©  2006  International  Association  for  Applied
Psychology.

