This article was downloaded by: [University of Nebraska]
On: 5 August 2008
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 788841431]
Publisher Psychology Press
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t716100704

Orienting of attention
Michael I. Posner a
a University of Oregon,

Online Publication Date: 01 February 1980

To cite this Article Posner, Michael I.(1980)'Orienting of attention',The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,32:1,3 — 25
To link to this Article: DOI: 10.1080/00335558008248231
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00335558008248231

 
 

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf

This article may be used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or
systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses
should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

Quarterly Journal  of EJrperimental Psychology (1980) 32, 3-25 

ORIENTING  OF ATTENTION* 

MICHAEL I.  POSNER 

University of  Oregon 

Bartlett viewed thinking as a high level skill exhibiting ballistic properties that he 
called  its  “point  of  no  return”.  This paper  explores one  aspect  of  cognition 
through the  use  of  a  simple model task  in  which  human  subjects are asked  to 
commit attention to a position in visual space other than fixation.  This instruction 
is executed by orienting a covert (attentional) mechanism that seems sufficiently 
time locked to external events that its trajectory can be traced across the visual field 
in  terms  of  momentary  changes in the efficiency of  detecting stimuli.  A  com- 
parison of  results obtained with alert monkeys, brain  injured and normal human 
subjects shows the relationship of this covert system to saccadic eye movements and 
to various brain systems controlling perception and motion. 
In accordance with 
Bartlett’s  insight,  the  possibility  is  explored  that  similar  principles  apply  to 
orienting of attention toward sensory input and orienting to the semantic structures 
used in thinking. 

Introduction 

Sir Frederic Bartlett wrote a book, Thinking, during the last part of his life (Bartlett, 
1958).  It is not as widely known as his earlier work, Remembering (Bartlett, 1932), 
but it had a strong impact on me, perhaps because it was among the first psychology 
books I read.  Bartlett’s theme was as simple as it was powerful.  Thinking is a 
skill and should be studied with the techniques that had proved successful in the 
In  particular,  I  was  struck  with  Bartlett’s 
study  of  other  skilled  behaviour. 
metaphor  that  thinking  like  swinging  a  bat,  has  a  “point  of  no  return”.  Once 
committed in a particular  direction, thought is ballistic in that it cannot be altered. 
It may  be  hard  to understand  why  this  idea  should  have  been  so exciting  to 
someone  reading  the  psychological  literature  in  1959. 
In  retrospect,  what 
captured  the  imagination  must  have  been  the  idea  that  a  hidden  psychological 
process like the formation of  a thought  might be rendered  sufficiently concrete to 
measure.  Twenty years later, when psychologists routinely measure the speed of 
rotation  of  visual images (Cooper and  Shepard,  1973) or the time needed  to scan 
the next  item of  an internally  stored list (Sternberg,  1969), it is hard  to reinstate 
the excitement that the prospect of such research could have engendered in at least 
one reader of  Bartlett’s book. 

During the last few years of  research on human cognition, there has grown up a 
number  of  similar  views  of  how  the  human  nervous  system  is  organized  in the 
performance  of  species-specific  human  behaviour  such as reading (LaBerge and 
* Text  of the  Seventh  Sir  Frederick  Bartlett  Lecture given at a meeting of the Experimental 
0 1980 The Experimental Psychology Society 

Psychology Society in Oxford, 5  July  1979. 
0033-5  j ~ X / ~ O / O I O O O ~  

f23  $OZ.OO/O 

3 

8
0
0
2
 
t
s
u
g
u
A
 
5
 
6
0
:
1
2
 
:
t
A
 
]
a
k
s
a
r
b
e
N
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
i
n
U
[
 
:
y
B
 
d
e
d
a
o
l
n
w
o
D

