CHILD DEVELOPMENT PERSPECTIVES

Autonomy and Relatedness Revisited: Cultural

Manifestations of Universal Human Needs

Heidi Keller

University of Osnabrueck

ABSTRACT—Autonomy and relatedness are considered basic
human needs that manifest differently in different cultural
environments in response to contextual demands. This arti-
cle conceptualizes 3 types of cultural environments—proto-
typical Western, urban, middle-class families; prototypical
rural, subsistence-based farming families; and a hybrid
milieu of urban middle-class families from non-Western
environments—and proposes that autonomy and related-
ness have different meanings in each type. In contexts in
which individuals have a high degree of formal education
(Western and non-Western middle-class families), there is
an emphasis on inner states and mental representations.
Western middle-class families focus on separate individuals;
non-Western middle-class families focus on the family as a
social unit. In contexts in which individuals have a low
degree of formal education, there is a primary emphasis on
social responsibilities. Different socialization strategies
support adaptive frameworks in each of the 3 types of con-
texts: individual psychological autonomy in Western mid-
dle-class families, communal psychological autonomy in
non-Western middle-class families, and action autonomy in
subsistence-based farming families. All conceptions of
autonomy and relatedness can be considered as universal
competencies, yet they are differently emphasized in differ-
ent cultural milieus due to differing contextual demands.

KEYWORDS—cultural milieus;
psychological
responsibility.

autonomy;

action

socialization strategies;
social

autonomy;

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Heidi Keller, Department of Culture and Development, Institute of
Psychology, University of Osnabru¨ck, Artilleriestr. 34, 49076
Osnabru¨ck, Germany; e-mail: heidi.keller@uni-osnabrueck.de.

ª 2011 The Author
Child Development Perspectives ª 2011 The Society for Research in Child Development
DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-8606.2011.00208.x

The need for autonomy and the need for relatedness can be con-
sidered as part of panhuman psychology. For healthy develop-
ment and well-being, individuals need communion as well as
agency (Bakan, 1966), love and belongingness as well as self-
actualization (Maslow, 1968), and closeness and interdepen-
dence with others as well as control over one’s own life (Ryan &
Deci, 2000). Humans acquire conceptions of autonomy and
relatedness during ontogenetic development through participa-
tion in everyday situations and routines. Yet the cultural mes-
sages that are embodied in everyday situations and routines
differ substantially across environmental contexts (Cowley,
Moodley, & Fiori-Cowley, 2004; Csordas, 1999; Keller, 2007;
Ochs & Izquierdo, 2009). Therefore, as a consequence of these
ontogenetic processes, individuals’ conceptions of autonomy and
relatedness will necessarily vary between different environments.
Over the past few decades, researchers have proposed various
conceptualizations of the relation between autonomy and related-
ness, ranging from the bipolar, unidimensional deﬁnition of indi-
vidualism⁄ collectivism (Hofstede, 2001; Triandis, 1995) to the
coexistence of independent dimensions (Deci & Ryan, 1991;
Kag˘itcibas¸ i, 1996; Kitayama & Uchida, 2005; Kuhl & Keller,
2008; Raeff, 2010). The premise of the bipolar, unidimensional
model of individualism⁄ collectivism is that autonomy and relat-
edness are mutually dependent constructs on the same contin-
uum. Individuals’ levels of autonomy and relatedness depend,
therefore, on the position that they occupy on the continuum: A
position closer to the autonomy pole excludes the existence of
relatedness to a large degree, and vice versa. Arising from multi-
ple criticisms of this conceptualization (e.g., Kag˘itcibas¸ i, 2007;
Killen & Wainryb, 2000; Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmelmeier,
2002; Raeff, 2010) are claims that autonomy and relatedness
coexist and need to coexist because they are both universal
human needs that are part of any human action and situation.
Kag˘itcibas¸ i (2007), for example, argues that individuals can be
autonomous as well as relational at the same time. Similar pro-
posals include the conceptions of interdependent agency (Yeh,
Bedford, & Yang, 2009), conjoint agency (Markus & Kitayama,

Volume 6, Number 1, 2012, Pages 12–18

2003), communal mastery (Hobfoll, Schroder, Wells, & Malek,
2002), and relationally autonomous reasons (Gore & Cross,
2006). Other authors exemplify the point of view that autonomy
and relatedness are both involved in everyday actions and situa-
tions across cultures. All these approaches have in common the
idea that autonomy⁄ agency mainly emphasizes the separate indi-
vidual with desires, intensions, and wishes (i.e., the inner world
of individuals) and the control of individual options and choices
(e.g., Savani, Markus, & Conner, 2008) and that relatedness cov-
ers the need for closeness with others and any actions and inten-
tions directed toward others. In this article, I argue that different
conceptions of autonomy and relatedness, as well as of their
interrelations, are needed, because contextual demands differ
substantially.

Different strands of science, such as neuroscience, evolution-
ary theory, and cognitive and socioemotional developmental psy-
chology, have demonstrated that infancy is a formative phase
during lifespan development
(Keller, 2007). Conceptions of
autonomy and relatedness during the early life period are scarce,
however. It is for this reason that I will focus on infancy and
early childhood in my discussion of these conceptions. Before
examining the different aspects of autonomy and relatedness and
their interplay in more detail, I will present an overview of cul-
tural environments and their differences.

DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENTS—DIFFERENT CULTURAL

MILIEUS

On the basis of both evolutionary psychology and psychocultural
research (Keller, 2008; LeVine, 1977; Whiting, 1980), I deﬁne
environments as contexts combining particular sociodemographic
characteristics that set the stage for the development of different
psychologies. In line with others, I consider individuals’ level of
formal education to be central in shaping reproductive histories
and related cultural values and practices (Greenﬁeld, 2009; Kel-
ler, 2007; LeVine, Miller, Richman, & LeVine, 1996). Higher
degrees of formal education are associated with a trend toward
smaller, nuclear households and having children later in life.
Lower degrees of formal education are associated with extended
households and having children earlier in life. Similarities in the
level of formal education, together with age at the birth of the ﬁrst
child, number of children, and household size prove to form simi-
lar cultural milieus with sets of beliefs, attitudes, norms, and val-
ues across different countries and geographical areas (Greenﬁeld,
2011; Keller, Borke, Lamm, Lohaus, & Yovsi, 2011).1

Research has identiﬁed three different types of environmental
contexts (without claiming to capture all of the environmental
variation on the planet): Two are prototypical contexts and the
third is a context combining various elements of the other two
(Keller, 2007). One prototypical context
is represented by

1It is important to stress that I refer here to formal education in particular insti-

tutions. I do not address education as part of everyday practices.

Autonomy and Relatedness

13

agrarian, subsistence-based environments, which are associated
with low levels of formal education, early onset of reproduction,
high numbers of children, and large multigenerational house-
holds. Another prototypical context is represented by Western
urban, postindustrialized, information-based environments with
high levels of formal education, later onset of reproduction, small
numbers of offspring, and nuclear-family households (Keller,
2008). There are multiple possible hybrid combinations of these
two prototypical contexts. One group of combinations is repre-
sented by middle-class families in non-Western societies who
have high levels of formal education (comparable to the Western
urban prototype) but who live in larger family units (comparable
to agrarian prototype). The number of children in these families
may vary but is usually more than 1–2 children in Western mid-
dle-class families and less than 5-plus children in non-Western
rural families (Keller, 2007). There are many other environmen-
tal contexts with different living arrangements.

It is important to stress that the two prototypical contexts are
not antithetical opposites on one dimension, as researchers often
mistakenly assume with reference to individualism⁄ collectivism.
Speciﬁcally, 5–7 years of formal education cannot be regarded
as the opposite of 15–17 years of formal education; one child
cannot be regarded as the opposite of ﬁve children; and becom-
ing a parent during one’s late teens cannot be regarded as oppo-
site of becoming a parent during one’s mid-30s. Instead, the two
prototypical contexts simply represent two very different socio-
cultural environments with substantially different views concern-
ing autonomy and relatedness. The cultural milieus in which
individuals and families live differ in systematic ways although
still allowing for interindividual variability within contexts, as
well as differences between contexts assigned to the same cul-
tural milieu. Nevertheless, there are pervasive characteristics
that differentiate between various environments and their respec-
tive cultural milieus.

DIFFERENT FACETS OF AUTONOMY AND

RELATEDNESS

As I brieﬂy outlined above, autonomy, deﬁned as the control and
realization of intentions, wishes, preferences, and mental states,
can be viewed from an individual perspective or from a
social⁄ communal perspective. Mind-mindedness (Meins et al.,
2003) and mentalization (Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, & Target,
2002), deﬁned as accurate reading, understanding, and appropri-
ate commenting on inner states in parent–child interactions, are
thought to play a major role for acquiring this conception of
autonomy. The individual perspective focuses on the individual’s
self-expression and self-enhancement. A child who is socialized
toward individual autonomy is encouraged from early on to make
his or her own choices and to fulﬁll his or her own aspirations.
The self-conscious and self-contained child is the cultural ideal
of Western, middle-class families. The communal perspective, in
contrast, prioritizes the social unit (i.e., the family). A child who

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 6, Number 1, 2012, Pages 12–18

