Dilemmas of Democratization in Latin America
Author(s): Terry Lynn Karl
Source: Comparative Politics, Vol. 23, No. 1, (Oct., 1990), pp. 1-21
Published by: Ph.D. Program in Political Science of the City University of New York
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/422302
Accessed: 28/04/2008 11:40

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=phd.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We enable the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

http://www.jstor.org

Dilemmas of Democratization in Latin America 

Terry Lynn Karl 

The demise of  authoritarian rule in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, and 
Uruguay, when combined with efforts at political liberalization in Mexico and the recent 
election  of  civilian  presidents in  Guatemala, El  Salvador, Honduras, and  Nicaragua, 
represents a political watershed in Latin America. This wave of regime changes in the 1980s 
places a number of questions on the intellectual and political agenda for the continent. Will 
these  newly  emergent and  fragile  democracies in  South  America be  able  to  survive, 
especially  in  the  context  of  the  worst  economic  recession  since  the  1930s?  Can  the 
liberalization of  authoritarian rule in Central America and the possible prospect of  honest 
competitive elections in Mexico be transformed into genuine democratic transitions? Will 
previously consolidated political democracies such as Venezuela and Costa Rica be able to 
extend the basic principles of citizenship into economic and social realms, or will they be 
"deconsolidated" by this challenge and revert to a sole preoccupation with survivability?' 
Behind such questions lies a central concern expressed by Dankwart A.  Rustow almost 
twenty years ago: "What conditions make democracy possible and what conditions make it 
thrive?"2 This article addresses Rustow's query by arguing the following. First, the manner 
in  which  theorists of  comparative politics  have  sought  to  understand democracy in 
developing  countries has  changed  as  the  once-dominant search  for  prerequisites of 
democracy has given way to a more process-oriented emphasis on contingent choice. Having 
undergone this evolution, theorists should now develop an interactive approach that seeks 
explicitly to relate structural constraints to the shaping of contingent choice. Second, it is no 
longer adequate to examine regime transitions writ large, that is,  from the general category 
of authoritarian rule to that of democracy. Such broad-gauged efforts must be complemented 
by the identification of different types of democracy that emerge from distinctive modes of 
regime transition as well  as an analysis of  their potential political, economic,  and social 
consequences. Before these issues and their implications for the study of Latin America can 
be addressed, however, a definition of democracy must be established. 

Defining Democracy 

Defining democracy is no simple task because the resolution of a number of disputes over 
both its prospects and evaluation rests on  how  the term itself  is  operationalized. If,  for 
example, democracy is defined in a Schumpeterian manner as a polity that permits the choice 
between elites  by  citizens  voting  in  regular and competitive elections,  the  militarized 
countries of Central America could be classified as political democracies by many scholars, 
just as they are (with the exception of Sandinista Nicaragua) by U.S.  policymakers.3 But if 
the definition is  expanded to  include a wider range of  political conditions-from  lack of 

1 

