 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Center for European Studies Working Paper Series #160 (2008) 

 (cid:1)French Suburbs(cid:1): A New Problem or  
a New Approach to Social Exclusion? 

 

by 

 

Prof. Sylvie Tissot 
Department of Sociology 

Marc Bloch University 

22 rue Descartes 

67084 Strasbourg cedex 

Tel. 33 3 88 41 73 00 
Fax 33 3 88 61 15 92 

stissot@umb.u-strasbg.fr 

 
 

Abstract 

 

 
At the end of 1980s, the question  of « quartiers sensibles » (at-risk neighborhoods) started 
to be very publicized in France. It was not  only the subject of many front-page articles, but also 
the target of a new public policy aimed at promoting urban and social development in about 500 
neighborhoods (Politique de la ville). I argue that such a focus on « quartiers sensibles » does not on-
ly result from increasing problems such as unemployment, poverty or juvenile delinquency ; it al-
so  represents  a  major  change  in  public  policy.  Focusing  on  « quartiers  sensibles »  directly  con-
tributed to the restructuring of the French welfare state by centering its action on specific urban 
spaces rather than national territory, and on social links rather than economic reality, contrary to 
what the welfate state claimed to do during the Fordist period. The outbreak of riots in Novem-
ber 2005 is inextricably bound up with the way some problems (like lack of communication and 
weakening  social links) have been associated  with  the question of « quartiers sensibles »  whereas 
the French model of integration, based on equality among abstract citizens, left some others (like 
ethnic discrimination) unquestioned. 
 

Crossing the Atlantic, speaking another language, entering a different academic environ-
ment  and  discovering  new  intellectual  traditions  have  many  benefits.  One  of  these  is  that  the 
process automatically calls into question the categories used to analyze society. It is particularly 
true  as  far  as  the  words  “suburbs”  in  English  and  “banlieue”  in  French  are  concerned.  While 
some wealthy cities and desirable neighborhoods do exist in the outskirt of Paris and other big 
cities, in French “banlieue” automatically evokes the image of housing projects, with young peo-
ple hanging around wearing baseball caps and sweatsuits, smoking joints, perhaps standing be-
side a burning car. “Banlieues” have become the symbol of a bleak urban environment, deviant 
youth and segregated minorities, whereas “suburb” in the United States designates quiet, weal-
thy areas, with nice, large houses and white middle- or upper-class families. Paradoxically, such 
gaps might be useful to expose the distant perspective I developed in my book on “French sub-
urbs” (Tissot 2007).  

 
My book, which seeks to challenge the consensus narrative about urban crisis, increasing 
racial or religious tensions and failure of the welfare state, is sometimes met with astonishment 
and even reproach in  France: shouldn’t sociologists  seek to  help “solve” the “problem of ban-
lieues” rather than endlessly “discussing” it? This complaint responds to the fact that the locus 
of my exploration of the “problem of banlieues” was not in the “banlieues” themselves. I analyzed 
what has been said on the suburbs since the mid-1980s, and studied the people who addressed 
this  question:  journalists,  civil  servants,  politicians,  experts,  statisticians,  sociologists,  social 
workers. In other words, I  did  not do fieldwork in the  banlieues; the people who appear in my 
book are not the people we watch on the nightly news, like those who participated in the No-
vember  2005  riots.  Instead,  I  analyzed  social  environments  that  are  not  usually  thought  of  as 
sites for sociological “fieldwork,” and people who are not generally considered subjects of socio-
logical interrogation: the people who write articles, books and reports, pass laws, make statistics; 
who count, classify, write, analyze. Drawing on Michel Foucault’s perspective, I decided to shift 
my attention from people who usually are counted, classified, and analyzed, to, instead, the peo-
ple who invent and use the tools, categories, words, concepts, languages to do these analyses. I 
was equally  inspired by  Pierre  Bourdieu’s  sociological perspective in the sense that  public  de-
bates were not my only material. I investigated the people who, while discussing the “problem 
of  the  suburbs,”  and  sometimes  disagreed  on  the  interpretation  of  the  problem,  promulgated 
new  ways  of  thinking  and  new  political  programs  (Bourdieu  1992,  and  more  specifically  pp. 
209-210).  What  analysis  of  the  “problem”  ultimately  prevailed  and  what  social  logics  made  it 
prevail?  What  consequences  for  the  material  world  did  this  analysis  have?  My  book  seeks  to 
answer these questions.  

 

The “reality” of the banlieues 
 

The  word  “banlieue”  is  not  new;  it  has  taken  on  many  different  meanings,  depending 
upon contexts and periods of history. More recently, the expression “quartiers sensibles” (literally 
“vulnerable neighborhoods”) appeared as part of the current terminology in public debates on 
urban  crisis  beginning  in  the  late  1980s;  it  was  unknown  before  then.  More  importantly,  since 
that time (the mid-1980s), both expressions, “banlieues” and “quartiers sensibles” (suburbs and un-
derprivileged  areas),  as  well  as  others  like  “quartiers  difficiles”–(problem  neighborhoods),  or 
“cités” (projects), have come into ubiquitous use in discussing socioeconomic topics. As a conse-
quence,  poverty, inequality or  unemployment are no  longer  discussed, or rather, they are  dis-
cussed only through territorial categories. Socioeconomic language has given way to a language 
of  space.  And  urban  crisis  seems  to  epitomize  all  problems  faced  by  French  society,  from  the 
failure of the welfare state to concerns about the French model of integration.  

 

