Language evolution and linguistic norms 

Nikola Kompa (University of Osnabrueck) 

19/10/14 – working draft 

Words  are  cheap  token,  so  why  would 
anyone believe them? 

Derek Bickerton 

Introduction 

The paper is an exercise in speculative anthropology. And here is the question that I should like 
to see answered: How might language have possibly evolved and which norms, if any, might have 
played a role in shaping it?  

For  present  purposes,  language  may  be  best  characterized  by  what  it  enables  us  to  do,  by  the 
function  it  serves.  Yet  language  answers  many  purposes.  Most  obviously,  it  is  a  means  of 
communication. Communication, in turn, serves different purposes. A large amount of what we 
say  each  day  is  aptly  characterized  as  small-talk  or  gossip.  Language  is,  as  John  Locke  already 
remarked “the great Instrument and common Tye of Society.“ (Locke E III.I.1) Yet language is 
as perfect a means of inclusion as of exclusion. It helps to demarcate the bounds of one’s group; 
those who speak my language (or my dialect) are those who belong to my group.  

But then, occasionally, we communicate in order to convey and share information; we say how 
thinks are–or at least how they look like from where we stand. Language allows us to describe the 
world; to acquire, store and pass information. It is a means to classify, to structure the manifold 
of appearances; by noticing similarities, we sort like things alike. We divide men into friend and 
foe, books into those worth reading and those not worth the while, our colleagues into potential 
partners for cooperation and others. Because these similarities and differences are important to 
us,  we  have  words  to  mark  them.  And  language  is  highly  productive;  it  allows  us  to  utter  and 
understand sentences that no one has ever uttered before (cf. Tallermann & Gibson 2012b). We 
are at liberty to think and express ideas and thoughts that haven’t been thought before and to 
invent  phrases  (metaphors,  for  example)  that  haven’t  been  used  before.  Moreover,  ideas  and 
thoughts can be conjured up at will. They are not simply impressed on us by the environment 
and bound to a particular situation; they are at our disposal (cf. Trabant 2008: 32). Most animal 
communication systems, on the other hand, comprise a rather restricted and mostly invariant set 
of signals that are meaningful in particular situations only and mostly bound to the here and now. 
Human beings, on the other hand are able to talk about future and past events, about possible or 
impossible events, etc. Language makes modal reasoning possible. We can describe other ways 

 

1 

the  world  might  be;  we  can  make  plans,  tell  stories,  and  write  fiction.  And  we  can  tell  lies. 
Language is commonly used to manipulate people, to bring them to do or think particular things. 
By  means  of  language,  “we  can  shape  events  in  each  other’s  brain  with  exquisite  precision“. 
(Pinker 1994: 1) (In the next section, most of these features will be discussed in slightly more 
detail.) 

What  kinds  of  norms  (or  normativity)  might  language  bring  into  play,  then?  To  a  first 
approximation, norms are rules governing behavior. Except from phonetic, morphological and 
syntactic rules that will not concern us here, there seem to be semantic norms, telling us how to 
apply  the  terms  of  our  language.  And  there  seem  to  be  pragmatic  norms,  regulating 
communicative interaction. Yet there are, arguably, also language-related social and moral norms.  

In the first and second part of the paper, I will speculate a bit about how language might have 
evolved  and  explore  differences  between  human  language  and  non-human  communication 
systems. One of the differences that I will elaborate on is the difference between (natural) signs, 
signals and symbols. I will claim that a certain level of communicative complexity is required for 
anything like linguistic normativity to enter the picture. The third and final part of the paper will 
be devoted to the question of what kinds of norms might have played a role in the evolution of 
symbolic language; the problem of honest communication will be addressed.  

1. Language evolution 

All animals communicate to some extent and in some sense. Some are even able to understand 
members of other species; some species learn to understand alarm calls of another species, for 
example (Zuberbühler 2012: 74); and certain domesticated animals also learn to understand ‘calls’ 
of another species. Yet all those animal communications systems are interestingly different from 
human  language.  The  gap  might  even  seem  unbridgeable.  What  could  be  possible  non-human 
primate  precursors  to  language?  We  seem  to  face  a  continuity  problem:  language  has  to  have 
evolved;  but  what  could  it  possible  have  evolved  from?  Yet  as  Derek  Bickerton  put  it: 
„Uniqueness isn’t the issue. Unlikeness is the issue.“ (2009:21) Language may be unique; but what 
is much harder to explain is why it is so unlike any other communication system. And suppose 
that  there  had  been  a  protolanguage;  it  would  have  consisted,  presumably,  of  a  handful  of 
(proto)words at the beginning. What could its selective advantage possibly have been? By way of 
reply one might deny that the communications system that eventually turned into language was 
adaptive at every stage. Saltationists even claim that language came about by a single (or a few) 
mutation(s)  (see  Tallermann  &  Gibson  2012b:  21).  But  then,  suppose  you  were  the  lucky  one 
with the mutation, thereby becoming linguistically much more skillful than all the others. How 

 

2 

