R E V I E W S

MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE IN
CANCER: ROLE OF ATP-DEPENDENT
TRANSPORTERS

Michael M. Gottesman, Tito Fojo and Susan E. Bates

Chemotherapeutics are the most effective treatment for metastatic tumours. However, the ability
of cancer cells to become simultaneously resistant to different drugs — a trait known as
multidrug resistance — remains a significant impediment to successful chemotherapy.  Three
decades of multidrug-resistance research have identified a myriad of ways in which cancer cells
can elude chemotherapy, and it has become apparent that resistance exists against every
effective drug, even our newest agents. Therefore, the ability to predict and circumvent drug
resistance is likely to improve chemotherapy.

Patients who have cancer that does not respond to local
excision or radiation (about 50% of total cancer cases),
and patients with haematological malignancies, are
treated with chemotherapy, immunotherapy and bio-
logical-response modifiers. But why can some patients
be cured by these approaches and others respond tran-
siently or incompletely? Host and tumour genetic
alterations, epigenetic changes and tumour environ-
ment all seem to contribute to the complex story of
cancer drug resistance1.

Cellular mechanisms of multidrug resistance
There are two general classes of resistance to anti-
cancer drugs: those that impair delivery of anticancer
drugs to tumour cells, and those that arise in the can-
cer cell itself due to genetic and epigenetic alterations
that affect drug sensitivity. Impaired drug delivery can
result from poor absorption of orally administered
drugs, increased drug metabolism or increased excre-
tion, resulting in lower levels of drug in the blood and
reduced diffusion of drugs from the blood into the
tumour mass2,3. Recent studies have emphasized the
importance of the tumour vasculature and an appro-
priate pressure gradient for adequate drug delivery to
the tumour4. In addition, some cancer cells that are
sensitive to chemotherapy as monolayer cells in cul-
ture  become  resistant  when  transplanted  into 

animal models5. This indicates that environmental
factors, such as the extracellular matrix or tumour
geometry, might  be  involved  in  drug  resistance.
Cancer cells grown in culture as three-dimensional
spheroids, mimicking their in vivo geometry, have also
been shown to become resistant to cancer drugs2,5,6.
Much remains to be learned about this type of drug 
resistance and its role in clinical oncology.

Cellular mechanisms of drug resistance have been
intensively studied, as experimental models can be easily
generated by in vitro selection with cytotoxic agents.
Cancer cells in culture can become resistant to a single
drug, or a class of drugs with a similar mechanism of
action, by altering the drug’s cellular target or by increas-
ing repair of drug-induced damage, frequently to DNA.
After selection for resistance to a single drug, cells might
also show cross-resistance to other structurally and
mechanistically unrelated drugs — a phenomenon that
is known as MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE. This might explain why
treatment regimens that combine multiple agents with
different targets are not more effective.

As illustrated in FIG. 1, different types of cellular 
multidrug resistance have been described. Resistance to
natural-product hydrophobic drugs — sometimes
known as classical multidrug resistance — generally
results from expression of ATP-dependent efflux pumps
with broad drug specificity. These pumps belong to a

Laboratory of Cell Biology
and Cancer Therapeutics
Branch, The Center for
Cancer Research, Building
37, Room 1A09, National
Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA. Correspondence 
to M.M.G.
e-mail:
mgottesman@nih.gov
DOI: 10.1038/nrc706

48 | JANUARY 2002 | VOLUME 2  

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

Summary 

• Multidrug resistance of cancer cells is a potentially surmountable obstacle to effective
chemotherapy of cancer.
• ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, including MDR1 (ABCB1), MRP1 (ABCC1)
and ABCG2, can confer multidrug resistance to cancer cells in vitro.
• MRP2 (ABCC2), MRP3 (ABCC3), MRP4 (ABCC4), MRP5 (ABCC5), ABCA2 and
BSEP (ABCB11) are capable of transporting drugs; future studies are needed to
determine a role in drug resistance.
• ABC transporters such as MDR1 and MRP1 are expressed in many human cancers,
including leukaemias and some solid tumours; in some studies, expression of these
transporters has been shown to correlate with response to therapy and survival.
• Inhibitors of ABC transporters such as MDR1/P-glycoprotein have been tested in  

clinical trials with a suggestion of benefit, especially in acute myelogenous leukaemia.

• Interpretation of clinical trials using inhibitors of MDR1/P-glycoprotein has been
confounded by their effects on the pharmacokinetics of anticancer drugs.
• Development of inhibitors of ABC transporters should focus on potency and
specificity to minimize unexpected pharmacokinetic effects.
• Efficacy should be confirmed using surrogate assays.
• Normal tissues might be protected from toxicity by gene transfer of drug-resistance 

genes.

• Prevention of ABC transporter induction in cancer cells might help to avert 

drug resistance.

family of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters that
share sequence and structural homology. So far, 48
human ABC genes have been identified and divided
into seven distinct subfamilies (ABCA–ABCG) on the
basis of their sequence homology and domain organi-
zation7. Resistance results because increased drug
efflux lowers intracellular drug concentrations. Drugs
that are affected by classical multidrug resistance include
the VINCA ALKALOIDS (vinblastine and vincristine), the
ANTHRACYCLINES (doxorubicin and daunorubicin), the
RNA transcription inhibitor actinomycin-D and the
microtubule-stabilizing drug paclitaxel8.

Resistance can also be mediated by reduced drug
uptake. Water-soluble drugs that ‘piggyback’ on trans-
porters and carriers that are used to bring nutrients into
the cell, or agents that enter by means of endocytosis,
might fail to accumulate without evidence of increased
efflux. Examples include the antifolate methotrexate,
nucleotide analogues, such as 5-fluorouracil and 
8-azaguanine, and cisplatin9,10.

Multidrug resistance can also result from activa-
tion of coordinately regulated detoxifying systems,
such as DNA repair and the CYTOCHROME P450 mixed-
function oxidases. Indeed, coordinate induction of the
multidrug  transporter  P-glycoprotein  (PGP)  and
cytochrome P450 3A has been observed11. This type of
multidrug resistance can be induced after exposure to
any  drug. Recent  evidence  indicates  that  certain
orphan nuclear receptors, such as SXR, might be
involved  in  mediating  this  global  response  to 
environmental stress12.

Finally, resistance can result from defective apoptotic
pathways. This might occur as a result of malignant
transformation; for example, in cancers with mutant or

MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE
Simultaneous resistance to
several structurally unrelated
drugs that do not have a
common mechanism of action.

VINCA ALKALOIDS
A family of natural-product
anticancer drugs, extracted from
the periwinkle family, that
depolymerize microtubules.
Examples include vincristine
and vinblastine.

ANTHRACYCLINES
Semi-synthetic anticancer
derivatives of anthraquinone
that intercalate into DNA and
inhibit DNA topoisomerase II.
Examples include daunorubicin
and doxorubicin.

CYTOCHROME P450
A group of enzymes that are
located on the endoplasmic
reticulum, and are involved in
drug metabolism and
detoxification. They are
primarily expressed in the liver
and small intestine.

MULTIFACTORIAL MULTIDRUG
RESISTANCE
Multidrug resistance caused by
several different mechanisms of
resistance that operate
simultaneously.

R E V I E W S

non-functional p53 (REF. 158). Alternatively, cells might
acquire changes in apoptotic pathways during exposure
to chemotherapy, such as alteration of ceramide levels13
or  changes  in  cell-cycle  machinery, which  activate
checkpoints and prevent initiation of apoptosis.

An important principle in multidrug resistance is
that cancer cells are genetically heterogeneous. Although
the process that results in uncontrolled cell growth in
cancer favours clonal expansion, tumour cells that are
exposed to chemotherapeutic agents will be selected for
their ability to survive and grow in the presence of cyto-
toxic drugs. These cancer cells are likely to be genetically
heterogeneous because of the mutator phenotype. So, in
any  population  of cancer  cells  that  is  exposed  to
chemotherapy, more than one mechanism of multidrug
resistance can be present. This phenomenon has been
called MULTIFACTORIAL MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE.

ATP-dependent transporters
Selection of cancer cells in culture with natural-prod-
uct anticancer drugs, such as paclitaxel, doxorubicin,
or vinblastine, frequently results in multidrug resis-
tance that is due to expression of the ABC transporter
PGP, the product of the ABCB1 (or MDR1) gene14,15.
PGP is a broad-spectrum multidrug efflux pump that
has 12 transmembrane regions and two ATP-binding
sites16 (FIG. 2). The  transmembrane  regions  bind
hydrophobic drug substrates that are either neutral or
positively charged, and are probably presented to the
transporter directly from the lipid bilayer8. Two ATP
hydrolysis events, which do not occur simultaneously,
are needed to transport one drug molecule17. Binding

Increased efflux
(ATP-dependent
efflux pumps)

Decreased influx

Activation of 
detoxifying systems
(cytochrome P450)

Activation of DNA repair

*

*

Blocked 
apoptosis
(e.g. decreased 
ceramide levels)

Figure 1 | Cellular factors that cause drug resistance.
Cancer cells become resistant to anticancer drugs by several
mechanisms. One way is to pump drugs out of cells by
increasing the activity of efflux pumps, such as ATP-dependent
transporters. Alternatively, resistance can occur as a result of
reduced drug influx — a mechanism reported for agents that
‘piggyback’ on intracellular carriers or enter the cell by means
of endocytosis. In cases in which drug accumulation is
unchanged, activation of detoxifying proteins, such as
cytochrome P450 mixed-function oxidases, can promote drug
resistance. Cells can also activate mechanisms that repair
drug-induced DNA damage. Finally, disruptions in apoptotic
signalling pathways (e.g. p53 or ceramide) allow cells to
become resistant to drug-induced cell death.

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

VOLUME 2 | JANUARY 2002 | 4 9

©  2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

