Overseas Development 

Institute

August 2011

    

Achieving pro-poor growth through 
investment in rural feeder roads:  
the role of impact evaluation

By Christian Kingombe

I mpact evaluation was high on the agenda at the 

recent  3rd  Global  Review  of  Aid-for-Trade  (AfT). 
Since the mid-2000s, interest in the analytically 
robust evaluation of the impact of projects, pro-
grammes and policies has increased amongst policy-
makers (Estache, 2010). With growing recognition of 
the links between high transport costs and poverty, 
this  trend  also  encompasses  an  increasing  interest 
in undertaking detailed evaluations of the impact of 
public investment in rural roads. This begs the ques-
tion: how do we identify what kind of public spending, 
including  AfT,  is  most  effective  in  reducing  poverty 
and generating equitable agricultural growth?

How,  for  example,  do  partner  countries  and 
donors  define  the  success  of  donor  investment  in 
rural  feeder  roads?  These  Aid-for-Trade  (AfT)  inter-
ventions  –  categorised  as  either  labour-based  or 
equipment-based rural transport infrastructure (RTI) 
– are engineered earth roads that connect rural areas 
to urban centres via the connection to secondary dis-
trict roads (Howe, 1984). Despite the large amounts 
spent on rural roads, there is remarkably little formal 
evidence on their benefits to households or to enter-
prises. What has been lacking is a general methodol-
ogy, using micro-data, to estimate these gains.

It  has  been  argued  that  RTI  and  provision  of  RTI 
services  –  including  rural  feeder  roads  –  could 
be  considered  pre-requisites  for  growth  and  the 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs). Improving access to markets, for example, 
can  lower  agricultural  input  prices  and  increase 
production (MDG1). Improving RTI and services can 

help children get to school (MDG2). But what actual  
impact  have  these  AfT  interventions  had  to  date? 
How could future research enhance this impact? And 
what  are  the  policy  implications?  This  Background 
Note  provides  suggestions  on  what  state-of-the-art 
AfT impact evaluations could look like, and why they 
should be part of a project’s design from the outset 
in order to improve policy conducive to achieving the 
MDGs.

The key issues
All countries are confronted with a range of growth 
constraints, however some of these are more severe 
and  visible  in  many  agriculture-based  low-income 
countries. Carrying out an analysis at the micro-level 
can help improve our growth diagnostics as well as 
our understanding of the transmission mechanisms 
that could lead to rural growth and poverty reduction. 
It  can,  therefore,  produce  policy-relevant  insights 
that go beyond what is known from the cross-country 
growth literature at the macro-level. 

The  general  practice  adopted  by  the  UN  Panel 
on Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) is that ex-post 
evaluations are designed as in-depth studies of the 
impact  of  an  intervention  and  are  usually  carried 
out every five to ten years after the completion of its 
funded implementation (Box 2, overleaf). 

A  good  example  following  these  guidelines  is 
Chen  et  al.  (2008),  who  revisit  the  site  of  a  large, 
World Bank-financed rural development programme 
in China ten years after it began and four years after 
disbursements  ended.  The  authors  collected  data 
on 2,000 randomly sampled households in project 

The  Overseas  Development  Institute  is  the  UK’s  leading  independent  think  tank  on  international  development  and  humanitarian  issues.  
ODI Background Notes provide a summary or snapshot of an issue or of an area of ODI work in progress. This and other Background Notes are 
available at www.odi.org.uk. 

advancing knowledge, shaping policy, inspiring practice

Background Note

Box 1: A snapshot of Aid for Trade (AfT) on the ground in Africa

A call for Aid for Trade (AfT) case stories was launched as part of the Third Global Review of Aid for Trade, to capture 
the wealth of experience accumulated by recipient countries and development partners since the AfT Initiative was 
launched at the Hong Kong Ministerial in 2005. The result of these efforts have been captured in Aid for Trade at a 
Glance (OECD and WTO, 2011), which compiles 269 AfT case stories received, including a total of 114 case stories on 
Africa.

When outlining the kind of contributions that may be submitted, the WTO categorised three types of case stories: 
(i) case stories on approaches; (ii) case stories on processes, and (iii) case stories on projects or programmes. The first 
category documents experiences of approaches that help identify binding constraints to trade, indicators which may 
help evaluate and monitor AfT, and formal empirical studies. However, this category is less represented in the African 
sample, with only one case story from a regional organisation, namely UNECA. Nonetheless, this single contribution 
documents the impact of AfT on binding trade constraints across the African continent, providing an overall picture of 
how AfT is helping overcome different constraints that reduce the competitiveness of African trade, and hence improve 
the continent’s ability to take advantage of multilateral trade liberalization.

Though several case stories deal with the ‘soft side’ of infrastructure under the AfT subcategory of trade facilitation, 
only one case story from the African sample covers trade-related infrastructure. Morocco’s experience with AfT relates 
to its National Programme of Rural Transport, aimed at reducing regional disparities, fighting poverty, promoting the 
inclusion of the rural sector and development of local resources, and finally, affording the rural population access to 
trade through the reduction of transport costs. The programme benefitted from the financial assistance of the African 
Development bank (AfDB) and the Agence Française de Développement (AFD) (through soft loans) for the first tranche. 
In total 7,950 km of rural roads were built during its first tranche and 7,550 km are envisaged for the second tranche, 
which still requires financing. Further, the rehabilitation of 1,000 km of rural roads was also undertaken thanks to the 
assistance of the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development during the first tranche of the programme.

Source: UNECE (2011).

Box 2: Monitoring and evaluation of rural development

The UN Panel on Monitoring and Evaluation of the UN ACC Task Force on Rural Development has set out common 
principles and basic concepts of monitoring and evaluation in the various UN agencies and organisations. It refers to 
agricultural and rural development projects and programmes benefitting the poor and to programmes which are multi-
sectoral with health, nutrition, education, housing and similar components.

Ex-post evaluation was defined by the December 1976 Copenhagen Meeting organised by the World Bank as an 
analysis after completion of a project (or a distinct phase of it) of its effects and impact. Among other things it may 
draw  on  information  provided  by  monitoring  and  ongoing  evaluation,  though  supplementary  special  studies  may 
sometimes be needed. The purpose of ex-post evaluation is to provide policy-makers with information and analysis 
for future planning and/or to inform donors and the general public on project results. The depths of the analyses and 
the nature of the reporting will depend on its potential end-use and benefits.

In addition the UNECE, FAO, OECD, World Bank and Eurostat published the Wye Group handbook on Rural Household 
Livelihood and Well-Being – Statistics on Rural Development and Agriculture Household Income in 2007 , which is of 
special interest to those in the public sector responsible for setting targets and monitoring policies related to: the 
standard of living and well-being of rural households vis-à-vis urban and all households; and the standard of living 
and well-being of agricultural households vis-à-vis households of other socio-professional categories. 

(112  public  works  programme  (PWP)  villages)  and 
non-project  (86  non-PWP  villages)  areas,  spanning 
ten  years.1  The  1996-2000  and  2004/05  surveys 
included  community,  household  and  individual 
questionnaires.  The  community  schedule  collected 
data on natural conditions, infrastructure and access 
to services. The household survey collected data on 
(inter alia) incomes, consumptions and assets. The 
Individual questionnaire covered gender, age, edu-
cation and occupation. Another recent example of a 
similar approach can be found in Kingombe (2011). 
In terms of rural feeder roads, Van de Walle (2009) 

adds that it is useful to start by thinking about the 
nature of roads and the ways in which they may differ 
from other rural policy investments. To justify public 
sector investments in rural feeder roads it is vital to 
show that they have a more positive project impact 
(i.e.  a  change  in  standard  of  living  and  increased 
capacity for self-sustained development of a group of 
beneficiaries or communities resulting from immedi-
ate project objectives)2 when compared to available 
alternatives  (Roemer  and Stern,  1975). This  can  be 
shown  by  incorporating  the  construction  of  robust 
counterfactual scenarios to the analysis.

2

