Journal of Sociolinguistics 17/1, 2013: 3–36

Diffusion of language change:

Accommodation to a moving target

Marie Maegaard, Torben Juel Jensen, Tore Kristiansen

and Jens Normann Jørgensen
University of Copenhagen, Denmark

The paper focuses on motivations for the spread of new features within a
speech community, and on the trajectories the changes follow during
diffusion. One set of data represents language use, and here focus is on two
changes which have been going on in Danish over the past 40 years, one
grammatical and one phonetic. The other set of data are results from a
nationwide speaker evaluation experiment which tests the subconscious
attitudes to different types of speech among the youth in ﬁve different places
covering Denmark from east to west. Results show that changes spread
centrifugally from Copenhagen, even to the extent that reversal of changes
spreads from Copenhagen. Furthermore, the attitudes reﬂected in the
speaker evaluation experiment support the theory that language change is
motivated by social psychological factors. Finally, it is argued that it is
worthwhile considering the possibility of media being involved in processes
of linguistic change.

Artiklen fokuserer pa˚ a˚rsager til spredning af nye træk i et sprogsamfund,
og pa˚ hvordan spredningen forega˚r. Et datasæt repræsenterer sprogbrug,
og her fokuseres pa˚ to forandringer som har fundet sted i dansk gennem de
sidste 40 a˚r, en grammatisk og en fonetisk. Det andet datasæt stammer fra
en landsdækkende undersøgelse af underbevidste holdninger til forskellige
typer af talesprog blandt unge pa˚ fem forskellige steder placeret i en linje
der dækker Danmark fra øst til vest. Resultaterne viser at ændringerne i
brug spredes centrifugalt fra København, i en grad sa˚ resten af landet
følger trop ogsa˚ na˚r København reverserer en igangværende ændring.
De vurderinger der kommer
til udtryk i holdningsundersøgelserne,
understøtter teorien om at sprogforandring er motiveret af socialpsykologiske
faktorer. Til slut argumenteres der for at det er værd at overveje mediernes
mulige rolle i sprogforandringsprocesser. [Danish]

KEYWORDS: Language change, real time, grammatical variation,
phonetic variation, language attitudes, standardization

© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2013
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK, and 350 Main Street, Malden MA 02148, USA

4

INTRODUCTION

MAEGAARD ET AL.

Language change basically presents to sociolinguistics two problems which
concern both innovation and diffusion. One problem concerns the why; the other
problem concerns the how of innovation and spread. In this article we focus on
the how and why of diffusion, i.e. we ask what motivates the spread of new
features within a speech community, and we ask what trajectories the changes
follow during diffusion.

Diffusion – how

Models of
linguistic diffusion commonly track how an observed linguistic
innovation spreads from a relatively narrow area or relatively narrow social
group to wider areas and groups. Several inﬂuential models build on water
metaphors to highlight an assumed basic difference in how linguistic
innovations spread. Among these models is the wave model (e.g. Bailey
1973) which sees diffusion happening in more or less concentric waves from a
centre to increasingly peripheral environments. Bailey (1973: 77), further-
more, describes change as happening in s-shaped curves, as the innovation
spreads slowly to new environments in the beginning, but gradually speeds up,
until almost complete, at which time it again slowly casts away the remaining
pockets of the old phenomenon (see, for instance, Kristensen and Thelander
(1984) who compare the spread of change in a Danish and a Swedish dialect
area as described by the wave model). According to Britain (2010a: 148), the
wave model sees ‘innovations, like the ripple effect caused when a pebble is
dropped into a puddle, radiate over time out from a central focal area, reaching
physically nearby locations before those at ever greater distances’, whereas
another model related to a water metaphor is the so-called cascade diffusion
model. Chambers and Trudgill mention the development described in this
model as ‘the jumping of the innovation from one large town to another, and
from these to smaller towns, and so on’ (1980: 192). Britain describes it as ‘the
hierarchical effect’
(2002: 623), since in cascade diffusion ‘innovations
descend down a hierarchy of large city, to city, to large town, to town, village
and country’ (Britain 2010a: 148). An early example is Trudgill (1974) who
traces the spread of an innovative pronunciation from larger town to smaller
town and from there to rural areas in Brunlanes, Norway. Trudgill theorizes
that the strength of a spreading inﬂuence can be quantiﬁed by measure of the
physical distance between the source and the eventual recipient of an
innovation, and by measure of their relative population sizes.

A third model associated with a water metaphor is the upstream model (Britain
2010a: 148; contra-hierarchical diffusion) which views innovations as spreading
from, for instance, rural areas to urban areas. Bailey et al. (1993) illustrate this
with the spreading of a quasi-modal, ﬁxin to, from rural to urban areas in
Oklahoma, a change that runs counter to other developments in the area.

© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2013

