Mary Ann Glendon contends that the language of "rights" has so invaded the public scene that
creative political discussion has become almost impossible.  Ms. Glendon is a Professor of Law
at Harvard University; her Rights Talk: The Impoverishment of Political Discourse, © by Mary
Ann Glendon, was just published by The Free Press, New York, a division of Macmillan, Inc.
In lieu of a review we present the preface from her book.

RIGHTS TALK: THE IMPOVERISHMENT
OF POLITICAL DISCOURSE
By Mary Ann Glendon

In the spring of 1990, men and women in East
Germany and Hungary participated in the first fully
free elections that had taken place in any of the East
European countries since they came under Soviet
control in 1945. Excitement ran high. The last
people to have voted in that part of the world were
now in their seventies. Some young parents, casting
their ballot for the first time, brought their children
with them to see the sight. Many, no doubt, will
long remember the day as one marked with both
festivity and solemnity. Meanwhile, in the United
States, public interest in politics appears to be at an
all-time low. Two months before the 1988
presidential election, polls revealed that half the
voting-age public did not know the identity of the
Democratic vice-presidential candidate and could
not say which party had a majority in Congress.1 In
that election, only half the eligible voters cast
ballots, thirteen percent less than in 1960.
Americans not only vote less that citizens of other
liberal democracies, they display a remarkable
degree of apathy concerning public affairs. Over a
period of twenty years, daily newspaper readership
has fallen from seventy-three percent of adults to a
mere fifty-one percent.2 Nor have the readers simply
become viewers, for ratings of network evening
news programs have dropped by  about twenty-five
percent in the past ten years, and the slack has not
been taken up by cable television news. Cynicism,
indifference, and ignorance concerning government
appear to be pervasive. By all outward indicators,
the right and obligation to vote — a subject of
wonder to East Europeans, and the central concern
of many of us who worked in the civil rights
movement of the 1960s — is now held here in rather
low esteem.

Poor voter turnouts in the United States are, of

course, mere symptoms of deeper problems, not
least of which are the decline of broadly
representative political parties, and the effect of the
"sound-bite" on serious and sustained political
discussion. On this deeper level lies the
phenomenon with which this book is concerned: the
impoverishment of our political discourse. Across
the political spectrum there is a growing realization
that it has become increasingly difficult even to

define critical questions, let alone debate and resolve
them.

Though sound-bites do not permit much airing

of issues, they seem tailor-made for our strident
language of rights. Rights talk itself is relatively
impervious to the other more complex languages we
still speak in less public contexts, but it seeps into
them, carrying the rights mentality into spheres of
American society where a sense of personal
responsibility and of civic obligation traditionally
have been nourished. An intemperate rhetoric of
personal liberty in this way corrodes the social
foundations on which individual freedom and
security ultimately rest. While the nations of Eastern
Europe are taking their first risk-laden and faltering
steps toward democracy, the historic American
experiment in ordered liberty is thus undergoing a
less dramatic, but equally fateful, crisis of its own. It
is a crisis at the very heart of the American
experiment in self-government, for it concerns the
state of public deliberation about the right ordering
of our lives together. In the home of free speech,
genuine exchange of ideas about matters of high
public importance has come to a virtual standstill.

This book argues that the prominence of a

certain kind of rights talk in our political discussions
is both a symptom of, and a contributing factor to,
this disorder of the body politic. Discourse about
rights has become the principal language that we use
in public settings to discuss weighty questions of
both right and wrong, but time and again it proves
inadequate, or leads to a standoff of one right
against another. The problem is not, however, as
some contend, with the very notion of rights, or with
our strong rights tradition. It is with a new version
of rights discourse that has achieved dominance over
the past thirty years.

Our current American rights talk is but one

dialect in a universal language that has developed
during the extraordinary era of attention to civil and
human rights in the wake of World War II. It is set
apart from rights discourse in other liberal
democracies by its starkness and simplicity, its
prodigality in bestowing the rights label, its
legalistic character, its exaggerated absoluteness, its
hyperindividualism, its insularity, and its silence

The Social Contract

62

Fall 1991

with respect to personal, civic, and collective
responsibilities.

"Our rights-laden political discourse
does provide a solution of sorts to the
communications problems that beset a
heterogeneous nation whose citizens
decreasingly share a common history,

literature, religion or customs.
But the `solution' has become

part of the problem."

This unique brand of rights talk often operates at
cross-purposes with our venerable rights tradition. It
fits perfectly within the ten-second formats currently
preferred by the news media,3 but severely constricts
opportunities for the  sort of ongoing dialogue upon
which a regime of ordered liberty ultimately depends.
A rapidly expanding catalog of rights — extending to
trees, animals, smokers, nonsmokers, consumers, and
so  on  —  not  only  multiplies  the  occasions  for
collisions,  but  it  risks  trivializing  core  democratic
values.  A  tendency  to  frame  nearly  every  social
controversy in terms of a clash of rights (a woman's
right to her own body vs. a fetus' right to life) impedes
compromise, mutual understanding, and the discovery
of  common  ground.  A  penchant  for  absolute
formulations ("I have the right to do whatever I want
with my property") promotes unrealistic expectations
and ignores both social costs and the rights of others.
A  near-aphasia  concerning  responsibilities  makes  it
seem legitimate to accept the benefits of living in a
democratic social welfare republic without assuming
the corresponding personal and civic obligations.

As  various  new  rights  are  proclaimed  or
proposed, the catalog of individual liberties expands
without much consideration of the ends to which they
are  oriented,  their  relationship  to  one  another,  to
corresponding  responsibilities,  or  to  the  general
welfare.  Converging  with  the  language  of  psycho-
therapy,  rights  talk  encourages  our  all-too-human
tendency to place the self at the center of our moral
universe. In tandem with consumerism and a normal
dislike  of  inconvenience,  it  regularly  promotes  the
short-run over the long-term, crisis intervention over
preventive measures, and particular interests over the
common  good.  Saturated  with  rights,  political  lan-
guage can no longer perform the important function of
facilitating public discussion of the right ordering of
our  lives  together.  Just  as  rights  exist  for  us  only
through  being  articulated,  other  goods  are  not  even
available to be considered if they can be brought to
expression only with great difficulty, or not at all.4

My principal aim in the chapters that follow has
been to trace the evolution of our distinctive current
rights dialect, and to show how  it frequently works

against  the  conditions  required  for  the  pursuit  of
dignified living by free women and men. With stories
and examples drawn from disputes over flag-burning,
Indian  lands,  plant  closings,  criminal  penalties  for
homosexual  acts,  eminent  domain,  social  welfare,
child support, and other areas, I have endeavored to
demonstrate  how  our 
talk
simultaneously reflects and distorts American culture.
It captures our devotion to individualism and liberty,
but omits our traditions of hospitality and care for the
community. In the images of America and Americans
that  it  projects,  as  well  as  in  the  ideals  to  which  it
implicitly  pays  homage,  our  current  rights  talk  is  a
verbal caricature of our culture — recognizably ours,
but  with  certain  traits  wildly  out  of  proportion  and
with some of our best features omitted.

simplistic 

rights 

Our rights-laden political discourse does provide
a solution of sorts to the communications problems
that  beset  a  heterogeneous  nation  whose  citizens
decreasingly  share  a  common  history,  literature,
religion, or customs. But the "solution" has become
part of the problem. The legal components of political
discourse, like sorcerers' apprentices, have taken on
new and mischief-making connotations when liberated
from  their  contexts  in  the  speech  community  of
lawyers. (A person has no duty to come to the aid of
a  "stranger.")  With  its  non-legal  tributaries  rapidly
dwindling, political rhetoric has grown increasingly
out of touch with the more complex ways of speaking
that Americans employ around the kitchen table, in
their  schools,  workplaces,  and  in  their  various
communities of memory and mutual aid.

Under these circumstances, what is needed is not
the abandonment, but the renewal, of our strong rights
tradition.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  we  might
develop a public language that would be better suited
in  complexity  and  moral  seriousness 
the
bewildering array of difficulties that presently face us
as  a  mature  democracy 
increasingly
interdependent world. Nor is it readily apparent how
the public forum, dominated as it is by images rather
than ideas, could be reclaimed for genuine political
discourse.

in  an 

to 

"A political Esperanto without roots

in a living cultural tradition

would die on the vine."

We cannot, nor would most of us wish to, import
some other country's language of rights. Nor can we
invent a new rhetoric of rights out of whole cloth. A
political Esperanto without roots in a living cultural
tradition would die on the vine. Throughout the book,
therefore, I have marshalled evidence that Americans
do  possess  several 
languages  of
relationship and responsibility that could help refine
our language of rights. In many settings, employing a

indigenous 

The Social Contract

63

Fall 1991

