P E R S P E C T I V E

Leadership for 

Quality and Innovation: 
Challenges, Theories, and a 
Framework for Future Research

JOHN R. LATHAM, UNIVERSITY OF NORTHERN COLORADO

© 2014, ASQ

This  perspective  paper  discusses  current  issues  facing 
leaders,  what  researchers  and  practitioners  know 
about  leadership  theory  and  practice,  and  what  they 
need  to  know  to  improve  leadership  in  the  future. 
A  key  issue  in  leadership  research  is  that  there  has 
been  no  convergence  toward  a  reasonable  number 
of  cogent  leadership  theories.  The  current  knowledge 
about  leadership  consists  of  narrow  definitions  of 
leader  effectiveness  that  are  disconnected  from  their 
context, so the application to practice is difficult. More 
research  is  needed  that  develops  leadership  frame-
works  and  models  that  integrate  transformational, 
servant, and spiritual leadership theories and include 
the context and a definition of success based on cre-
ating  value  for  multiple  stakeholders.  A  framework 
for  future  leadership  research  is  proposed  along  with 
a “call to action.”

Key  words:  ambidextrous  organization,  diversity, 
innovation,  leadership  failures,  leadership  theories, 
quality,  servant  leadership,  spiritual  leadership, 
stakeholders, sustainability, transactional leadership, 
transformational leadership

INTRODUCTION

Leadership continues to be a popular topic for quality 
professionals, organizational leaders, researchers, con-
sultants, and a variety of commentators. Unfortunately, 
there are numerous examples of leadership failures, 
ranging  from  ethical  disasters  to  the  workers  who 
hate their boss and their job. Both reduce individual 
engagement and reduce organizational performance. 
However, after years of practicing and researching lead-
ership, there is still no reasonable number of cogent 
and  coherent  theories  for  leaders  to  follow  that  will 
predict  success.  To  make  matters  worse,  the  task  of 
leadership  at  all  organizational  levels  seems  to  be 
getting  more  and  more  difficult.  Perhaps  too  much 
credit for organizational success and failure is given 
to leaders, but there is consensus among scholars and 
practitioners  that  it  is  important  and  it  does  make 
a  difference.  W.  Edwards  Deming  understood  the 
importance of leaders using their influence to improve 
quality by attending training sessions on quality princi-
ples and practices. Deming even walked out when some 
executives refused to attend their company’s training.

LEADERSHIP IS 
INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT

The number and type of stakeholders exerting pressure 
on organizations has increased from a narrow focus on 
investors and customers and now includes stakeholders 

www.asq.org 11

such as employees, suppliers, and partners, along with 
the community and the natural environment. Similar 
to the quality crisis of the 1980s, many leaders today 
have proposed that creating value for multiple stake-
holders requires trade-offs between the stakeholders in 
a “zero sum game.” Alternatively, creating value for 
the multiple stakeholders could be done with innova-
tion  and  imagination  by  reinventing  the  methods 
and systems so they produce more value for all stake-
holders. The good news is there are many “proof of 
concept”  examples  such  as  those  described  in  Esty 
and Winston (2009) and ASQ’s Socially Responsible 
Organization initiative.

Modern organizations must be ambidextrous (i.e., 
able to execute and innovate) in order to be success-
ful because of the multiple environmental pressures 
they  face  and  because  they  must  organize  a  diverse 
workforce to do this work. Organizations that are only 
good  at  one  or  the  other  will  not  survive,  let  alone 
thrive,  in  the  coming  decades.  Those  that  are  only 
good at execution will end up making reliable products 
that few will buy. Organizations that are only good at 
innovation and strategy will experience “boom bust” 
cycles, with many early sales only to experience a steep 
decline when they cannot deliver on their promises. 
Unfortunately, some quality departments are perceived 
as having their foot on the brake when the innovative 
marketing  department  puts  its  foot  on  the  gas.  The 
good news is, some organizations have demonstrated 
that it is possible to run the business and change the 
business  simultaneously,  by  weaving  these  two  con-
cepts throughout the organization’s strategies, systems, 
scorecards, and incentives (see Clarke American 2001, 
30).  To  succeed  now  and  in  the  future,  leaders  will 
have to design organizations with the ability to do both 
with an increasingly diverse workforce operating in a 
complex global environment.

Leading these boundaryless organizations requires 
individuals who recognize that people and communi-
ties are not just a means to an organizational outcome, 
but are also an end in, and of, themselves. There is no 
shortage of advice on how to lead, but unfortunately 
the validity of this advice varies widely and it is not 
clear how much of this advice might best be applied 
to  address  the  current  issues  given  the  numerous 

12 QMJ VOL. 21, NO. 1/© 2014, ASQ 

compounding variables. The modern workforce con-
tinues to increase in diversity (on many dimensions), 
complicating  the  leadership  task  in  an  increasingly 
global environment. Organizations and their complex 
global supply chains comprise groups from around the 
world creating and delivering products to diverse and 
global customer segments while operating in a wide 
variety of situations, governing rules, cultures, political 
policies, and so forth. In addition, these human-created 
complex systems are increasingly unstable and thus 
unpredictable, raising risk and anxiety among leaders 
everywhere. So where does one go from here?

WHAT IS EFFECTIVE 
LEADERSHIP?

While there is no shortage of concepts comprising the 
many leadership theories, there is little consensus on 
what constitutes effective leadership (Gordon and Yukl 
2004). The current leadership body of knowledge is a 
fragmented and “messy landscape” comprising inputs 
from  a  variety  of  contributors  including  academics, 
practitioners,  and  consultants,  with  numerous  self-
proclaimed experts and commentators thrown in for 
good measure. Academics propose competing leader-
ship theories and research, and continue to research 
only their favorite theory, without integrating the find-
ings of these different theories. On the other end of the 
spectrum, there are thousands of books on leadership 
and even more articles and blog posts. Unfortunately, 
some of the advice is nonsense made up to “fill” blog 
posts so the authors can increase their authority on 
the topic in the eyes of their online followers. Typically, 
theories  eventually  go  through  a  convergent  phase 
where  the  models,  constructs,  and  relationships  are 
tested, eliminated, refined, and so forth in a process of 
narrowing down the number of competing theories. 
However, once created, leadership theories are seldom 
discarded (Glynn and Raffaelli 2010). This “academic 
amnesia” (Sayles and Stewart 1995) has resulted in a 
situation where, according to Hunt and Dodge (2000), 
one can leave the field of leadership research for an 
extended period of time and return to find that it is 
as if he or she had never left. In addition, none of the 

Leadership for Quality and Innovation: Challenges, Theories, and a Framework for Future Research