Neuropsychologia 42 (2004) 707–712

Rapid publication

Haptic face recognition and prosopagnosia

Andrea R. Kilgour a,∗

, Beatrice de Gelder b, Susan J. Lederman c
a Department of Clinical Health Psychology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man., Canada R3E 3N4

b Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory and FC Donders Center for Cognitive Brain Imaging, Tilburg University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

c Department of Psychology, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ont., Canada K7L 3N6

Received 23 October 2002; received in revised form 28 January 2003; accepted 7 November 2003

Abstract

Cases of cross-modal inﬂuence have been observed since the beginning of psychological science. Yet some abilities like face recogni-
tion are traditionally only investigated in the visual domain. People with normal visual face-recognition capacities identify inverted faces
more poorly than upright faces. An abnormal pattern of performance with inverted faces by prosopagnosic individuals is characteristi-
cally interpreted as evidence for a deﬁcit in conﬁgural processing essential for normal face recognition. We investigated whether such
problems are unique to vision by examining face processing by hand in a prosopagnosic individual. We used the haptic equivalent of the
visual-inversion paradigm to investigate haptic face recognition. If face processing is speciﬁc to vision, our participant should not show
difﬁculty processing faces haptically and should perform with the same ease as normal controls. Instead, we show that a prosopagnosic
individual cannot haptically recognize faces. Moreover, he shows similar abnormal inversion effects by hand and eye. These results suggest
that face-processing deﬁcits can be found across different input modalities. Our ﬁndings also extend the notion of conﬁgural processing to
haptic face and object recognition.
© 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Touch; Face-inversion effect; Multisensory

1. Introduction

Cases of cross-modal inﬂuence have been noted since
the beginning of psychological science. In 1839, Brewster
reported that observers who saw indented objects (e.g.,
engraved seals) through an optical device that inverted ap-
parent concavity, also experienced a haptic inversion effect
when they explored these objects simultaneously by touch
(Brewster, 1839). The corresponding question—is failure
to recognize what one sees also associated with a failure
to recognize what one touches—has rarely been raised.
In light of the ongoing debate on face speciﬁcity and the
importance of prosopagnosia to this discussion, it appears
highly relevant to ask whether a deﬁcit in face recogni-
tion by vision might be associated with a deﬁcit in face
recognition by touch (i.e., the haptic system).

Neurologically intact individuals process faces more by
their overall conﬁguration than by their local features (de
Gelder & Rouw, 2000a; Freire, Lee, & Symons, 2000).
To investigate this conﬁgural or holistic (Tanaka & Farah,
1993) recognition strategy, researchers have predominantly

∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-204-787-5187; fax: +1-204-787-3755.
E-mail address: akilgour@exchange.hsc.mb.ca (A.R. Kilgour).

0028-3932/$ – see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2003.11.021

used the inversion effect, which is deﬁned as a decrease in
performance when recognizing inverted as oppose to up-
right faces (Valentine, 1988; Yin, 1969). Results that show
a relatively stronger inversion effect for faces than for other
mono-oriented objects have also been interpreted as evi-
dence that faces occupy a special status (Diamond & Carey,
1986) among visually apprehended objects. This weaker in-
version effect for non-face objects is presumably due to
recognition that is more strongly based on features and less
disrupted by inversion (Leder & Bruce, 2000).

for

faces

The inversion effect plays an important role in understand-
ing the visual deﬁcits of patients with a category-speciﬁc
recognition deﬁcit
(prosopagnosia). Some
prosopagnosic individuals do not demonstrate the typical
inversion effect, while others process inverted faces bet-
ter than upright faces (de Gelder & Rouw, 2000b; Farah,
Wilson, Drain, & Tanaka, 1998). The paradoxical inversion
effect (de Gelder & Rouw, 2000b) indicates that conﬁgural
processing is disrupted but not totally absent. When the need
for conﬁgural processing is removed (by inverting the face),
a feature-based analysis can be performed more easily.

Previous studies have been conﬁned to investigating face
recognition and its deﬁcits in the visual modality only. Yet
there is no intrinsic link between vision and face recognition

708

A.R. Kilgour et al. / Neuropsychologia 42 (2004) 707–712

or prosopagnosia. In fact, intact lower-level visual abili-
ties ﬁgure prominently among the diagnostic criteria for
prosopagnosia. And disorders of higher cognition can either
be limited to a single sensory modality or occur across more
than one modality (Feinberg, Gonzalez-Rothi, & Heilman,
1986), depending on whether the information is available to
more than one sensory system. Haptic face recognition has
recently been demonstrated in normal individuals (Kilgour
& Lederman, 2002); however, it has never been studied in
prosopagnosics.

Can a prosopagnosic individual recognize faces solely by
touch? We investigated this question using a haptic inversion
paradigm in which our prosopagnosic participant, LH, was
required to decide whether two faces (or two non-faces) were
the same or different from one another. To date, LH’s sense
of touch has never been assessed formally. We therefore also
evaluated his sensorimotor hand function.

2. Method

2.1. Participants

2.1.1. Patient

LH is a 51-year-old man who sustained bilateral
occipito-temporal, right frontal, and anterior temporal le-
sions subsequent to a motor vehicle accident in 1968. He
has been prosopagnosic since that time. Detailed neuropsy-
chological information can be obtained in other reports
(Etcoff, Freeman, & Cave, 1991; Farah, Levinson, & Klein,
1995; Farah, Tanaka, & Drain, 1995; Levine, Calvanio, &
Wolf, 1980).

2.1.2. Control group

We tested seven gender-, age- and education-matched,
neurologically intact participants as controls for LH (mean
age = 51.3 years, S.D. = 2.3). These participants com-
pleted four blocks (18 trials/block) with the same stimuli
that we presented to LH. The blocks consisted of faces and
teapots, each presented in upright and inverted positions.
Additionally, each control-group participant completed a vi-
sual face-recognition test (Benton, Sivan, Hamsher, Varney,
& Spreen, 1994), and was within normal limits.

All participants provided informed consent. The General
Ethics Research Board of Queen’s University has given ap-
proval to this study.

2.2. Materials and procedures

2.2.1. Assessment of sensorimotor hand function

LH was blindfolded in all conditions but for visual
face recognition. Four preliminary tests assessed LH’s
cutaneous thresholds, ﬁne motor dexterity and haptic
object-recognition capabilities. To determine LH’s tactile
sensitivity, we used von Frey hairs, consisting of nylon
monoﬁlaments of varying diameters, each calibrated to

bend with the application of a speciﬁc pressure. The stim-
uli were applied to the volar surface of the index ﬁnger
of each hand. LH was required to state whether or not he
detected the stimulus. A two-alternative (Y/N) adaptive
forced-choice procedure was used, with the pressure thresh-
old calculated as the average of the pressures corresponding
to ﬁve changes in response direction.

We measured LH’s tactile acuity using a two-point dis-
crimination test. We used a set of four octagonal-shaped
disks, each containing pairs of rounded metal prongs (1 mm
diameter) arranged around the disk circumference in order of
increasing inter-prong separation. The inter-prong distance
was measured from the center of each prong and ranged
from 1.2 to 9.0 mm in 0.2-mm steps. The prongs were ap-
plied perpendicularly to the long axis of the volar surface of
the index ﬁnger with just enough pressure for LH to deter-
mine that he was being stimulated. LH’s task was to decide
whether he felt one or two points. A two-alternative adaptive
forced-choice procedure was used, with the two-point touch
threshold calculated as the average of the inter-gap distances
corresponding to ﬁve changes in response direction.

LH’s ﬁne motor control was assessed using the Grooved
Pegboard Test (Lafayette Instrument, 1970), a task that re-
quires the participant to unimanually place 25 metal pegs
into holes as quickly as possible.

LH’s ability to haptically identify common objects was
tested using a set of 24 household objects presented to his
right (dominant) hand. He was required to name these ob-
jects as quickly and as accurately as possible.

2.2.2. Discrimination of face and non-face objects

We assessed LH’s haptic ability to discriminate whether
an object was an upright facemask, inverted facemask, up-
right teapot, or inverted teapot. All the faces and the teapots
were made of stoneware clay. Fig. 1 shows three pairs of
both the facemasks and the teapots. The clay facemasks were
models of 36 female volunteers (for details see Kilgour &
Lederman, 2002). We presented an exemplar from one of
these four categories of stimuli one at a time and asked LH
to identify the category to which it belonged. Each combi-
nation of object-type by orientation was presented on one
quarter of the 64 trials. LH was required to state whether or
not the object was an upright face.

2.2.3. Visual face-matching

We also tested LH’s ability to discriminate the face-
masks visually. This task was completed after the primary
face/nonface experiment. The methodology was identical to
that described below for the haptic task.

2.2.4. Haptic inversion paradigm

LH performed a 2AFC same/different face discrimina-
tion task. A “standard” facemask was presented to LH, who
manually explored it with no time restriction. The standard
face was then replaced with a second “comparison” face-
mask to explore. LH was required to state whether the two

