Clinical Psychology Review 27 (2007) 425 – 457

Suspicious minds: The psychology of persecutory delusions

Daniel Freeman

Department of Psychology, PO Box 77, Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, Denmark Hill, London, SE5 8AF, UK

Received 6 July 2006; accepted 10 October 2006

Abstract

At least 10–15% of the general population regularly experience paranoid thoughts and persecutory delusions are a frequent
symptom of psychosis. Persecutory ideation is a key topic for study. In this article the empirical literature on psychological
processes associated with persecutory thinking in clinical and non-clinical populations is comprehensively reviewed. There is a
large direct affective contribution to the experience. In particular, anxiety affects the content, distress and persistence of paranoia. In
the majority of cases paranoia does not serve a defensive function, but instead builds on interpersonal concerns conscious to the
person. However, affect alone is not sufficient to produce paranoid experiences. There is also evidence that anomalous internal
experiences may be important in leading to odd thought content and that a jumping to conclusions reasoning bias is present in
individuals with persecutory delusions. Theory of mind functioning has received particular research attention recently but the
findings do not support a specific association with paranoia. The threat anticipation cognitive model of persecutory delusions is
presented, in which persecutory delusions are hypothesised to arise from an interaction of emotional processes, anomalous
experiences and reasoning biases. Ten key future research questions are identified, including the need for researchers to consider
factors important to the different dimensions of delusional experience.
© 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Delusions; Paranoia; Cognitive; Schizophrenia; Psychosis

1. Introduction

We are living in paranoid times, with fears of others attaining a new intensity. Nonetheless, being overly wary of the
intentions of others has long been recognised as a problem. In the seventeenth century Francis Bacon (1612), often
credited as the founder of the scientific method, commented on the corrosive nature of the experience: ‘Suspicions
amongst thoughts are like bats amongst birds, — they ever fly by twilight. Certainly they are to be repressed, or, at the
least, well guarded. For they cloud the mind, they lose friends, and they check with business, whereby business cannot
go on currently and constantly. They dispose kings to tyranny, husbands to jealousy, wise men to irresolution and
melancholy.’

Yet in the last 10 years there has been a rapid development in the understanding of persecutory thinking, assisted by
the focus on it as a phenomenon of interest in its own right rather than simply as a symptom of severe mental illness
(Bentall, 1990). The argument that will be put forward in this review is that there is now an excellent opportunity to

E-mail address: D.Freeman@iop.kcl.ac.uk.

0272-7358/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2006.10.004

426

D. Freeman / Clinical Psychology Review 27 (2007) 425–457

take the starting point of this work of the last 10 years and make dramatic increases in the understanding of persecutory
thinking. Explanatory models can become as powerful as those for emotional disorders and lead to more effective
psychological interventions for paranoia. But also emphasised are the significant conceptual and methodological
limitations of previous work.

2. The definition of persecutory delusions

There have, of course, been many commentaries on the limitations of definitions of delusional beliefs in general, in
that most criteria do not apply to all delusions, which partly results from epistemological difficulties in determining the
referent of a name by a single set of necessary or sufficient characteristics (see Kripke, 1980). This has all too often
been a rarefied academic debate without consideration of the implications for research or clinical practice.

The most sustainable position is that of Oltmanns (1988). Assessing the presence of a delusion may best be
accomplished by considering a list of characteristics or dimensions, none of which is necessary or sufficient, that with
increasing endorsement produces greater agreement on the presence of a delusion. For instance, the more a belief is
implausible, unfounded, strongly held, not shared by others, distressing and preoccupying then the more likely it is to
be considered a delusion. The practical importance of the debate about defining delusions is that it informs us that there
is individual variability in the characteristics of delusional experience (see Table 1). Delusions are definitely not
discrete discontinuous entities. They are complex, multi-dimensional phenomena (Garety & Hemsley, 1994). The
implication is that there can be no simple answer to the question ‘What causes a delusion?’ Instead, an understanding of
each dimension of delusional experience is needed: what causes the content of a delusion? What causes the degree of
belief conviction? What causes resistance to change? What causes the distress? It is plausible that different factors are
involved in different dimensions of delusional experience. Research on the causes of different dimensions of delusional
experience is rare; a few studies consider delusional conviction (Freeman et al., 2004; Garety et al., 2005) and
delusional distress (Freeman & Garety, 1999; Freeman, Garety, & Kuipers, 2001; Startup, Freeman, & Garety, in
press). The implication for clinical practice is that clinicians need to think with clients about the aspect of delusional
experience they are hoping will change during the course of an intervention (see Birchwood & Trower, 2006) and
formulate accordingly.

In contrast to the debates about defining delusions, diagnostic criteria for sub-types of delusional beliefs based upon
content have not been a topic of comment. Many reports of studies are unclear about the definition of persecutory
delusions used. This is perhaps because the issue is thought to be self-evident, but it is more complex than might be

Table 1
The multi-dimensional nature of delusions

Characteristic of
delusions

Unfounded

Firmly held

Resistant to change

Preoccupying

Distressing

Interferes with

social functioning

Involves personal

reference

Variability in characteristic

For some individuals the delusions reflect a kernel of truth that has been exaggerated (e.g. the person had a dispute with the
neighbour but now believes that the whole neighbourhood is monitoring them and will harm them). It can be difficult to
determine whether the person is actually delusional. For others the ideas are fantastic, impossible and clearly unfounded (e.g.
the person believes that s/he was present at the time of the Big Bang and is involved in battles across the universe and
heavens).
Beliefs can vary from being held with 100% conviction to only occasionally being believed when the person is in a particular
stressful situation.
An individual may be certain that they could not be mistaken and will not countenance any alternative explanation for their
experiences. Others feel very confused and uncertain about their ideas and readily want to think about alternative accounts of
their experiences.
Some people report that they can do nothing but think about their delusional concerns. For other people, although they firmly
believe the delusion, such thoughts rarely come into their mind.
Many beliefs, especially those seen in clinical practice, are very distressing (e.g. persecutory delusions) but others (e.g.
grandiose delusions) can actually be experienced positively. Even some persecutory delusions can be associated with low
levels of distress (e.g. the individual believes that the persecutor hasn't the power to harm them).
Delusions can stop people interacting with others and lead to great isolation and abandonment of activities. Other people can
have a delusion and still function at a high level including maintaining relationships and employment.
In many instances the patient is at the centre of the delusional system (e.g. ‘I have been singled out for persecution’). However
friends and relatives can be involved (e.g. ‘They are targeting my whole family’) and some people believe that everybody is
affected equally (e.g. ‘Everybody is being experimented upon’).

