Student: Juan Pablo Fagiani 
Dozent: Prof. Dr. Armin Schäfer 
Seminar: Demokratie und Kapitalismus: Perspektiven 
auf ein widersprüchliches Verhältnis 
WS 2014/15 
 

 

Wolfgang Streeck – The crisis of democratic capitalism (2011) 

 

“A decent, ethical society would pay only marginal attention to profits” 
(Noam Chomsky1) 
 
 
The  whole  literature  on  the  relationship  between  free  markets  and  free  democratic  societies  can  by 
analyzed  from  two  different  perspectives.  One  of  those  asserts  that  there  is  a  tension  between  the 
concepts of capitalism and democracy, and it can be divided between liberals and left authors. Among the 
latter, Streeck explains how it is not possible for governments to simultaneously abide by the principles 
that guide democratic societies and free markets, even though those governments commited to. Mainly, 
the  author  poses  the  question  ‘What  are  the  conflicting  principles  that  makes  disequilibrium  and 
instability  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception  of  the  advanced  capitalist  economies?  And,  based  on  this 
intrinsic conflict, how can the financial crisis that started in 2008 be explained?  

 

The  main  argument  of  Streeck  (2010)  is  that  advanced-capitalist  societies  enhance  a  constant  conflict 
between  two  principles.  On  the  one  hand,  marginal  productivity,  as  evaluated  by  the  workings  of  free 
markets. On the other hand, social rights or entitlements, regarding the collective choices of democratic 
policies. The attempts of the government to fulfill simultaneously both principles is impossible since both 
of  them  almost  never  align  –  it  is  virtually  a  dog  chasing  his  own  tail.  “Good  economic  policy  is  non-
political  by  definition”  (Op.  cit.:  10).Moreover,  an  essential  claim  of  Streeck’s  statement  is  that  this 
conflict is to be analyzed within democratic capitalism. 

According to this author’s posture, during the 19th and almost the first half of the 20th century there was 
evidence that capitalism and democracy ‘may not sit easily together’2. However, after the Second World 
War, it was widely agreed that, for capitalism to be in accordance with democracy, the former would have 
to be subjected to extensive political control. Thus, democracy would be protected from being inhibited 
by the free play of market forces. Streeck (2011) refers to this societal model ‘democratic capitalism’ and 
its  hard-core  enhances  the  tension  of  both  principles  named  above.  Based  on  a  non-alignment  of  the 

                                                           
1  Source:  “Democracy’s  invisible  line”,  Le  Monde  Diplomatique,  August  2nd  2008.  Available  online  at: 
http://mondediplo.com/2007/08/02democracy  
2 Such tension was manifested in the different perspectives and goals a) the bourgeoisie and the political Right 
and b) the rising working class and the political Left were striving for. On the one hand, the fear of the majority 
rule could hinder private property and the play of free market forces by the formers. On the other hand, the 
concern  that  capitalist  will  make  a  collision  to  avoid  democracy  in  order  to  be  governed  by  a  majority  that 
strives for social and economic redistribution (Streeck 2011). 

Essay – Wolfgang Streeck – The crisis of democratic capitalism (2011) 

  1 

contradictory principles the model strives for, the governments can for some time neglect one in favor of 
the other. Nevertheless, those governments are eventually punished by its consequences3.  

Ever since the implementation of democratic capitalism in the post-war period, Streeck (2011) asserts this 
tension has never been solved, but rather it has been crystallized in different ways. “[T]he epicentre of the 
tectonic  tension  within  democratic  capitalism  has  migrated  from  one  institutional  location  to  the  next, 
giving  rise  to  a  sequence  of  different  but  systematically  related  economic  disturbances”  (Op.  cit.:  23). 
Consequently,  the  toleration  of  inflation  (between  the  mid-1940s  and  mid-1970s),  the  acceptance  of 
public debt (between mid-1970s and late 1980s) and deregulation of private credit (between 1990s and 
2008)  were  no  more  than  temporary  patches  or  stopgaps  to  the  inherent  two-principle-conflict  of 
democratic  capitalism.  For  this  reason,  “the  present  crisis  can  only  be  fully  understood  in  terms  of  the 
ongoing,  inherently  conflictual  transformation  of  the  social  formation  we  call  ‘democratic  capitalism’” 
(Op. cit.: 5). 

In terms of Streeck (Op. cit.), the financial crisis that began in 2008 forced once again a migration of the 
democratic  capitalism’s  tension  from  one  institutional  location  to  another,  and  therefore  produced 
economic  disturbances.  Those  disturbances  have  two  main  consequences.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
manifestation of a fierce struggle between global financial investors and nation-states, a distinctive new 
feature.  On  the  other  hand,  the  complexity  this  crisis  gained4.  “Since  then  [1980s],  the  battlefields  on 
which  the  contradictions  of  democratic  capitalism  are  fought  out  have  become  ever  more  complex, 
making  it  exceedingly  difficult  for  anyone  outside  the  political  and  financial  elites  to  recognize  the 
underlying interests and identify their own” (Op. cit.: 28). Just some elites have power over these topics, 
which opposes to an egalitarian democratic perspective. 

In accordance to the development of ideas of authors who perceived the ‘inegalitarian’ logic of capitalism 
as a threat for the ‘egalitarian’ order of democracy, Polanyi describes the idea of Marktgesellschaft. This 
idea  could  be  considered  as  the  inversion  of  values  from  the  market  as  an  instrument  to  procure 
wellbeing to a goal by itself and, ultimately, the adoption of the market rationale not just by the economy 
but by society as a whole (Branco 2012). The implementation of this Marktgesellschaft as the alternative 
to  Collectivism,  would rejoice  Hayek. Nevertheless  what  happened with  the  crisis  that  began  in  2008  is 
not  completely  a  Marktgesellschaft  –  as  the  punishing  market  mechanisms  did  not  operate  over  those 
who made wrong decisions or economically acted following profit-seeking regardless of any sort of ethics. 
It was rather a selective operationalization of the punishing market mechanism in favor of financial elites. 
Accordingly, “the political manageability of democratic capitalism has sharply declined in recent years […] 
in  the  emerging  global  political-economic  system”  (Op.  cit.:  24)  by  the  actions  taken  by  those  financial 
elites.  In  other  words,  as  Lindblom  suggested  with  the  concept  of  ‘market  as  a  prison’,  those  elites 
constraint  policy-makers  who  (have  to)  strive  for  the  common  interest  in  favour  of  their  profit-seeking 

                                                           
3 More specifically, “their majority, while those that disregard the claims for compensation from the owners of 
productive resources, as expressed in the language of marginal productivity, cause economic dysfunctions that 
will become increasingly unsustainable and thereby also undermine political support” (Op. cit.: 7). 
4 This crisis takes various elements, namely a) “[s]ome governments, including the Obama administration, have 
attempted to generate renewed economic growth through even more debt”; b) other governments “may be 
secretly hoping for a return to inflation, melting down accumulated debt by softly expropriating creditors”; c) 
“financial  markets  may  be  looking  forward  to  a  promising  fight  against  political  interference”;  d)  “financial 
markets need government debt for safe investment […], since “[t]he middle classes of the advanced-capitalist 
countries  have  put  a  good  part  of  their  savings  into  government  bonds”  (Op.  cit.:  22);  e)  “[t]he  same 
Manhattan-based ratings agencies that were instrumental in bringing about the disaster of the global money 
industry are now threatening to downgrade the bonds of states that accepted a previously unimaginable level 
of  new  debt  to  rescue  that  industry  and  the  capitalist  economy  as  a  whole”  (Op.  cit.:  26);  among  other 
elements. 

Essay – Wolfgang Streeck – The crisis of democratic capitalism (2011) 

  2 

