Biodivers Conserv
DOI 10.1007/s10531-010-9957-z

O R I G I N A L P A P E R

Monitoring population and gene pool dynamics
of the annual species Capsella bursa-pastoris
(Brassicaceae): a review of relevant species traits
and the initiation of a long-term genetic monitoring
programme

Barbara Neuffer • Karl-Georg Bernhardt • Herbert Hurka •
Matthias Kropf

Received: 27 August 2009 / Accepted: 22 November 2010
Ó Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

Abstract Species that colonise habitats on an annual basis are important for studying and
understanding evolutionary changes and adaptations in the course of environmental shifts,
caused, for instance, by global change phenomena. These species are characterised by a
weedy ecology enabling them to react fast to environmental changes. As a model species,
we selected Capsella bursa-pastoris (Brassicaceae, Shepherd’s Purse), which is annual to
biennial, predominantly selﬁng and closely related to the genetic model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. Differentiation and adaptation in C. bursa-pastoris are shortly reviewed. Based
on this knowledge, two Botanical Gardens are currently arranging long-term sites char-
acterised by annual ploughing for the genetic monitoring of C. bursa-pastoris. Demo-
graphic parameters will be monitored as well, i.e. different life-cycle phases such as
ﬂowering, fruiting, and the soil seed bank. Furthermore, seeds of at least 20 individuals
will be sampled per year. Isozyme analyses, ﬂow cytometry, AFLPs, SNPs as well as
microsatellites will be utilised to characterise changes in genetic diversity patterns over
time. In general, the objective of our genetic monitoring of C. bursa-pastoris is to address
the following questions: In the light of future research, our objectives are to study whether
the genetic structure and diversity of C. bursa-pastoris alter over time, whether a possible
invasion of ecotypes/genotypes of Sheperd’s purse is traceable using genetic markers, and
whether it is possible to relate variation in reproductive patterns to respective candidate
genes, which may be useful for monitoring.

B. Neuffer  H. Hurka
Institute of Botany, University of Osnabrueck, Barbarastr. 11, 49076 Osnabrueck, Germany

K.-G. Bernhardt (&)
Institute of Botany, University of Natural Resources and Applied Life Sciences,
Gregor Mendel-Str. 33, 1180 Vienna, Austria
e-mail: karl-georg.bernhardt@boku.ac.at

M. Kropf
Institute of Integrative Nature Conservation Research, University of Natural Resources and Applied
Life Sciences, Gregor Mendel-Str. 33, 1180 Vienna, Austria

123

Keywords Colonising species  Annual weeds  Global change  Genetic monitoring 
Ecotypic differentiation  Flowering time  Molecular markers  Permanent plots

Biodivers Conserv

Abbreviations
AFLP Ampliﬁed fragment length polymorphism
a.s.l.
SC
SI
SNP

Above sea level
Self-compatible
Self-incompatible
Single nucleotide polymorphism

Introduction

Colonising species play an important role in evolutionary studies because they provide
convenient experimental material and often exhibit rapid evolutionary change (see for
instance Baker 1974; McNeill 1976; Brown and Marshall 1981; Silvertown and Charles-
worth 2007). In particular, ruderal plants and agricultural weeds are characterised by high
phenotypic plasticity and genetic adaptability, optimally adapted to open disturbed habitats
(Adahl et al. 2006). As such, these plants are good target and model species for analysing
adaptations to changing environmental conditions (cf. Hurka and Neuffer 1991; Pigliucci
and Noah 1998).

Consequences of recent climatic changes on plant distributions and on natural systems
in general, are already recognisable worldwide (Parmesan and Yohe 2003; Root et al.
2003; Walther 2008). Many plants of predominantly Mediterranean to sub-Mediterranean
origin, most notably agricultural weeds (cf. Essl and Rabitsch 2002), have expanded in
like Crambe hispanica
distribution range and are immigrating into Central Europe,
(Bernhardt and Laubhann 2006), Diplotaxis erucoides and Capsella rubella (Bernhardt
et al. 2008) into Austria. Also, Central European winter annuals have already been
observed forming a second generation within one year, and summer annuals persist
throughout the winter until the next vegetation season, or the differentiation between
summer and winter annuals has disappeared completely, at
locally/regionally
(Bernhardt, personal observation).

least

To analyze both, (i) the spreading of plant species and/or their ecotypes/genotypes in
relation to ongoing environmental change, and (ii) the impact of this colonisation process
on the gene pool and population structure, long-term biomonitoring experiments are highly
desirable. Here, we propose species of the genus Capsella (Brassicaceae) as appropriate
model plants, and outline adequate experiments. Capsella bursa-pastoris is listed as one of
the most common plants on earth (Coquillat 1951; Zhou et al. 2001), and biosystematic
aspects of Capsella species are well studied, as will be shown below.

Our study questions include the following:

(1) How do the genetic structure and diversity of C. bursa-pastoris alter over time and to

(2)

what extent is such a change related to ecological factors?
Is a possible invasion of ecotypes/genotypes of C. bursa-pastoris preferring warmer
climate conditions, and/or of its close relative C. rubella traceable using genetic
markers?

123

