Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
Vol. 95, pp. 2609–2614, March 1998
Neurobiology

Overrepresentation of horizontal and vertical orientation
preferences in developing ferret area 17

(oblique effect兾activity maps兾orientation maps兾optical imaging)

BARBARA CHAPMAN* AND TOBIAS BONHOEFFER†
Max Planck Institute of Neurobiology, Am Klopferspitz 18A, 82152 Munich-Martinsried, Germany

Edited by Carla J. Shatz, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, and approved December 10, 1997 (received for review May 23, 1996)

ABSTRACT
One of the fundamental principles of visual
cortical organization is that neurons form a ‘‘map’’ in which
neighboring cells have similar orientation preferences. Pre-
vious anatomical and imaging studies have shown that al-
though the exact layouts of these orientation preference maps
vary between individuals, features of iso-orientation domains
such as width and spacing appear constant within a species.
Using chronic optical imaging of intrinsic signals we now
demonstrate that in ferret area 17 a larger proportion of
cortical surface is dominated by responses to horizontal and
vertical contours than to the two oblique orientations. This
was true for all ferrets studied both during development and
in adulthood. Interestingly, however, we found that the degree
of the overrepresentation varied significantly between indi-
vidual animals. In some young ferrets, responses to horizontal
and vertical stimuli developed faster than responses to oblique
stimuli, and a much larger percentage of the cortex responded
preferentially to horizontal and vertical stimuli. In other
individuals, responses to all stimuli developed at roughly the
same rate, and there was relatively little overrepresentation of
horizontal and vertical preferences.

We have used chronic optical imaging of intrinsic signals (1) to
examine developing orientation activity maps in ferret primary
visual cortex. The ferret was chosen for these studies because
it has a visual system similar to the cat’s (2) but is born
approximately 3 weeks earlier in development (3), thus pro-
viding a robust physiological preparation during the time that
orientation-specific responses develop (ref. 4; see also refs. 5
and 6).

The technique of optical imaging permits observation of the
overall spatial organization of orientation preference across a
region of visual cortex, information not easily obtained from
single-unit studies. Furthermore, by measuring the collective
response of a large number of neurons simultaneously, optical
imaging avoids many of the sampling problems that can occur
in studies of single-cell responses. Chronic imaging allows the
development of orientation maps to be followed over time in
individual animals, removing the necessity to pool data across
animals. This technique therefore is not only ideal for assessing
the proportion of cortical surface devoted to processing dif-
ferent orientations during development, but it can also reveal
interanimal variability in the representation of orientation
preferences, which would be missed by conventional electro-
physiological recordings.

All of the ferrets in this study (eight developing and three
adult) showed a significant overrepresentation of horizontal
and vertical versus oblique orientation preferences in their
cortical maps. In the eight developing ferrets, there were large

differences in the magnitude of this anisotropy. Furthermore,
in the developing animals with larger anisotropies, the hori-
zontal and vertical activity maps also tended to develop
significantly faster than the oblique maps.

The bias toward horizontal and vertical preferences seen in
all of the ferrets studied is consistent with electrophysiological
studies in the cat (7–14) and kitten (15), which suggest that
there may be more cortical cells with horizontal and vertical
preferences. The observed interanimal variability in the degree
of the bias is surprising, as previous studies have suggested that
basic features of iso-orientation domains such as hypercolumn
spacing are relatively constant between animals (refs. 16–24;
but see also ref. 25). The variability may, however, help to
explain why some laboratories have failed to demonstrate the
horizontal兾vertical bias electrophysiologically in either cats
(26–28) or kittens (29–31). Finally, this variability might
underlie the interindividual variation that has been observed
in psychophysical studies of the ‘‘oblique effect’’
in cats,
monkeys, and humans (32–36).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Optical Imaging of Intrinsic Signals. Eight young (31–35
days old at the beginning of the experiments) and three adult
(4.5 months to 1 year old) ferrets (Marshall Farms, New Rose,
NY) were used in this study. Experiments were performed
under aseptic conditions by using standard procedures for
optical
imaging (37). Anesthesia was induced by using a
mixture of xylazine and ketamine. Animals were intubated and
mechanically ventilated. Anesthesia was maintained by using
1–3% halothane delivered in a 3:1 mixture of nitrous ox-
ide:oxygen. End-tidal carbon dioxide was maintained at 3.8–
4.2%. Subcutaneous injections of ⬇1 ml兾hr 5% dextrose
Ringer’s solution were administered to prevent dehydration.
During the initial imaging session, the scalp was incised and
retracted and a craniotomy was performed over the caudal
pole of the left hemisphere. The dura remained intact. Two
percent agar and a glass coverslip were applied over the
craniotomy. Animals were fitted with contact lenses to focus
the eyes on the monitor placed 33 cm in front of the animal.
The brain was illuminated through the dura by using a halogen
lamp and fiber optics, with the illumination band-pass filtered
at 707 ⫾ 10 nm, a wavelength that provides good penetration
of the dura. The signals were recorded with a cooled charge-
coupled device camera (Princeton Instruments, Trenton, NJ)
and a macroscope (38) focused approximately 500 ␮m below
the cortical surface. Five frames of 600-msec duration were
collected during each 3-sec stimulus presentation. Following
each recording session, the agar and coverslip were removed,
and the craniotomy was flushed with sterile saline and covered

The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge
payment. This article must therefore be hereby marked ‘‘advertisement’’ in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. §1734 solely to indicate this fact.
© 1998 by The National Academy of Sciences 0027-8424兾98兾952609-6$2.00兾0
PNAS is available online at http:兾兾www.pnas.org.

This paper was submitted directly (Track II) to the Proceedings office.
Abbreviation: ROI, region of interest.
*Present address: Center for Neuroscience, 1544 Newton Court,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616.
†To whom reprint requests should be addressed.

2609

2610

Neurobiology: Chapman and Bonhoeffer

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998)

with a 3% agar plug containing chloramphenicol antibiotic
(Paraxin, Bayer). The fascia and scalp were sutured and the
scalp wound was infused with lidocaine and covered with a
topical antibiotic. The animal was then allowed to recover
from the anesthesia before being returned to its mother.

Visual Stimuli. Visual stimuli were produced by using
custom-made software (STIM, Kaare Christian, Rockefeller
University, NY) and were presented binocularly on a 21-inch
monitor placed 33 cm away from the ferret. The stimuli
consisted of full-screen square-wave gratings drifting at 10–
15°兾sec, presented at four different orientations: horizontal,
vertical, and the two obliques. The spatial frequency ranged
from 0.5 to 0.15 cycles兾degree (this value was chosen empir-
ically to optimize the activity signal and varied with age
probably because of changing optics in the ferrets’ maturing
eyes); the same spatial frequency was used for all orientations
in a given recording session. The stimuli were randomly
interleaved, and each was generally presented 128 times.

Calculation of Activity Maps and Polar Maps. To reduce
noise in the acquired images, signal averaging was used. To
remove nonorientation-specific signals such as uneven illumi-
nation and blood-vessel artifacts from the maps, each orien-
tation activity map was normalized to the average of maps seen
in response to all orientations (for details, see ref. 9). The
resulting images are termed single-condition maps.

The information from single-condition activity maps in
response to all four orientations of stimuli were combined into
single, color-coded ‘‘polar maps’’ by using vectorial addition on
a pixel-by-pixel basis (for details, see ref. 9).

Calculation of Orientation Preference Areas. The propor-
tion of cortex that prefers each of the four orientations was
determined by calculating an ‘‘orientation preference area’’ for
each orientation from data contained in the polar maps. The
first step in this analysis was to determine a region of interest
(ROI) for each animal containing only the area of the map
where orientation-specific activity was seen in the most mature
map. Next, the data in the polar maps from each animal at each
recording age were passed through a threshold procedure such
that all dark pixels with little or no orientation-specific re-
sponse (vector length ⬍0.1 of maximum) were not included in
any of the four orientation preference areas. The orientation
preference area for each orientation was then calculated as the
percentage of total pixels within the ROI whose response
preference fell within the four 45° orientation ranges centered
on 0, 45, 90, and 135° (i.e., those pixels within a given color
range). The polar maps were chosen for this analysis because
they give a better indication of the area of cortex that prefers
a given orientation than do the single condition maps, which
show the area that responds to a given orientation.

The threshold value of 0.1 was chosen for this analysis
because it resulted in inclusion of ⬍5% of total pixels in very
early maps that appeared featureless and inclusion of ⬎75% of
pixels in the most mature maps studied in each animal. Varying
the threshold value to 0.01 (resulting in inclusion of ⬎90% of
pixels in the most immature maps) to vector length 0.2
(resulting in inclusion of only 25% of pixels in the most mature
maps) did not change the basic shapes of the orientation
preference area graphs.

To quantify the uncertainty in this measurement, orienta-
tion preference areas were calculated for individual data
blocks (each block representing the response to 64 stimulus
presentations) recorded from each animal during each record-
ing session, as well as for the entire session. The multiple blocks
allowed us to estimate the standard deviation in the measure-
ments.

To provide a single number characterizing its magnitude we
defined the anisotropy from the orientation preference areas
as [(horizontal ⫹ vertical) ⫺ (left oblique ⫹ right oblique)]兾
(total area) ⫻ 100%. A 100% anisotropy would result from
maps where there was no representation of the obliques; a 0%

anisotropy would result if there were equal representation of
all orientations.

Determining the rate of the development of responses to
each orientation from the response area data is problematic
for two reasons. First, the final map recorded in each animal
may not represent a completely mature map, so there is no
available measure of the fully developed anisotropy in each
animal. Second, any quantitative analysis of the rates of
development of response areas would necessitate modeling the
growth rate, and there is no theoretical or empirical reason for
us to adopt any particular underlying mathematical func-
tion—in some animals (e.g., ferret 1-5-413) the development
appears approximately linear whereas in others (e.g., ferret
1-2-413) it does not.

Cross-Correlation Analysis of Map Maturation. To quan-
tify how mature each orientation activity map was at each age
in a model-independent manner, two-dimensional (2-D) cross-
correlations were performed between each recorded activity
map and the most mature map recorded for that stimulus
orientation in that animal. The first step in the correlation
analysis was to determine an ROI for each animal as described
above. To control for possible misalignment of the maps, we
calculated the correlation coefficients between the two maps
for x and y offsets ranging from ⫺30 to 30 pixels (each pixel
corresponds to 36 ⫻ 36 ␮m2 of cortex). The largest of these
values was then taken as the measure of correlation between
the two maps. A value of 0 indicates an immature map; a value
near 1 indicates a more fully developed map. Note that no
significant brain growth occurs during the period covered by
these experiments (37) and thus is not a confounding factor in
this analysis.

RESULTS

Optical imaging of ferret area 17 was performed through the
intact dura, and activity maps in each animal at each age were
generated in response to moving square-wave gratings at each
of four orientations: horizontal, vertical, and the two obliques.
Examination of the resulting images revealed different pat-
terns of orientation development. In some ferrets, activation of
iso-orientation domains responding to horizontal and vertical
gratings developed faster than domains responding to ob-
liquely oriented gratings. These animals also showed greater
overrepresentation of cortical area preferring horizontal and
vertical stimuli. In other ferrets, domains responding to all
orientations developed roughly in parallel. These ferrets
tended to show only a modest overrepresentation of horizontal
and vertical preferences.

Activity maps illustrating the range of the developmental
patterns observed are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Each row of these
figures shows orientation-specific maps recorded in the left
primary visual cortex at the indicated age. The first four
columns show single-condition activity maps recorded in re-
sponse to a specific orientation. To determine the overall
organization of orientation preference in the cortex, informa-
tion from the four activity maps was combined into a single,
color-coded ‘‘polar map’’ shown in the right-most columns. In
the polar maps, the color of each pixel encodes the preferred
orientation of cells in that region of cortex, whereas the
brightness indicates the orientation selectivity (for details see
refs. 9 and 39).

Maps from a ferret showing faster development of horizon-
tal and vertical domains are shown in Fig. 1. In this animal,
there was little or no orientation-specific response to any
stimulus during the earliest imaging session on postnatal day
32. By postnatal day 35, however, clear horizontal and vertical
activity maps were present, although weak if any maps were
seen with oblique stimuli. Oblique maps became obvious,
though still weak, by postnatal day 37. Horizontal and vertical
maps appear to be fully developed (i.e., no longer changing) by

