This is a reformatted version of an article that appeared in Rev. Modern Physics 66, 1481-1507 (1994)

Biological Pattern Formation : from Basic Mechanisms to Complex

Structures

A. J. Koch1 and H. Meinhardt

http://www.eb.tuebingen.mpg.de/meinhardt; hans.meinhardt@tuebingen.mpg.de

Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology

Spemannstr. 35, D- 72076 T¨ubingen

The reliable development of highly complex organ-
isms is an intriguing and fascinating problem. The
genetic material is, as a rule, the same in each cell
of an organism. How do then cells, under the inﬂu-
ence of their common genes, produce spatial pat-
terns ? Simple models are discussed that describe
the generation of patterns out of an initially nearly
homogeneous state. They are based on nonlinear
interactions of at least two chemicals and on their
diffusion. The concepts of local autocatalysis and of
long range inhibition play a fundamental role. Nu-
merical simulations show that the models account
for many basic biological observations such as the
regeneration of a pattern after excision of tissue or
the production of regular (or nearly regular) arrays of
organs during production of regular (or nearly regu-
lar) arrays of organs during (or after) completion of
growth.
Very complex patterns can be generated in a repro-
ducible way by hierarchical coupling of several such
elementary reactions. Applications to animal coating
and to the generation of polygonally shaped patterns
are provided.
It is further shown how to generate a
strictly periodic pattern of units that themselves ex-
hibit a complex and polar ﬁne structure. This is il-
lustrated by two examples : the assembly of photore-
ceptor cells in the eye of Drosophila and the position-
ing of leaves and axillary buds in a growing shoot. In
both cases, the substructures have to achieve an in-
ternal polarity under the inﬂuence of some primary
pattern forming system existing in the ﬂy’s eye or in
the plant. The fact that similar models can describe
essential steps in so distantly related organisms as
animals and plants suggests that they reveal some
universal mechanisms.

1

1. INTRODUCTION

A most fascinating aspect of biological systems is the
generation of complex organisms in each round of the
life cycle. Higher organisms develop, as the rule, from a
single fertilized egg. The result is a highly reproducible
arrangement of differentiated cells. Many processes are
involved, for example cell differentiation, cell movement,
shape changes of cells and tissues, region-speciﬁc con-
trol of cell division and cell death. Development of an
organism is, of course, under genetic control but the ge-
netic information is usually the same in all cells. A crucial
problem is therefore the generation of spatial patterns
that allow a different fate of some cells in relation to oth-
ers.

The complexity of the evolving pattern seems to pre-
clude any mathematical theory. However, by experi-
mental
interference with a developing organism it has
turned out that the individual steps are fairly indepen-
dent of each other. For instance, the organization of the
anteroposterior axis (i.e., the head to tail pattern) in a
Drosophila embryo is controlled by a completely different
set of genes than the dorsoventral axis. Shortly after its
initiation, the development of a wing is largely indepen-
dent of the surrounding tissue and can progress even at
an ectopic position after transplantation. Therefore, mod-
els can be written for elementary steps in development.
The linkage of these steps requires then a second ap-
proximation.

The necessity of mathematical models for morpho-
genesis is evident. Pattern formation is certainly based
on the interaction of many components. Since the inter-
actions are expected to be nonlinear, our intuition is in-
sufﬁcient to check whether a particular assumption really
accounts for the experimental observation. By modelling,
the weak points of an hypothesis become evident and the
initial hypothesis can be modiﬁed or improved. Models
contain often simplifying assumptions and different mod-
els may account equally well for a particular observation.
This diversity should however be considered as an ad-
vantage : multiplicity of models stimulates the design of

experimental tests in order to discriminate between the
rival theories. In this way, theoretical considerations pro-
vide substantial help to the understanding of the mecha-
nisms on which development is based (Berking, 1981).

In his pioneering work, Turing (1952) has shown that
under certain conditions two interacting chemicals can
generate a stable inhomogeneous pattern if one of the
substances diffuses much faster than the other. This
result goes against “common sense” since diffusion is
expected to smooth out concentration differences rather
than to generate them.

However, Turing apologizes for the strange and un-
likely chemical reaction he used in his study. Meanwhile,
biochemically more feasible models have been devel-
oped and applied to different developmental situations
(Lefever, 1968 ; Gierer and Meinhardt, 1972 ; Gierer,
1977 ; Murray, 1990). Chemical systems have also
been intensively investigated for their ability to produce
“Turing patterns” : some experiments present beautiful
reaction-diffusion structures in open reactors (Ouyang et
al., 1989 ; Castets et al, 1990 ; de Kepper et al., 1991).

In the ﬁrst part of this article, after having shortly dis-
cussed the relevance of chemical gradients in biological
systems, we shall present simple models of pattern for-
mation and their common basis, local self-enhancement
and long range inhibition. The patterns that can be
generated are graded concentration proﬁles, local con-
centration maxima and stripe-like distributions of sub-
stances.
In the second part we shall show how more
complex patterns can be generated by hierarchical su-
perimposition of several pattern forming systems. The
formation of a regular periodic arrangement of different
cell types or the generation of polygonal patterns will be
discussed. The models of that section are original and
so far unpublished.

Appendix 7 contains a complete discussion of the lin-
ear stability analysis in the case of the simplest models.
The parameters used for the simulations presented here-
after are listed in Appendix 8. A reader interested in nu-
merical simulations should feel no difﬁculty to reproduce
or improve the results.

Throughout the paper, comparisons of models with
experimental observations are provided. If necessary the
biological background is outlined in such a way that the
article should be understandable without previous knowl-
edge of biology.

2. GRADIENTS IN BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
In many developmental systems small regions play an
important role because they are able to organize the fate
of the surrounding tissue. The mouth opening of a hy-
dra or the dorsal lip of an amphibian blastula are well
known examples. Transplantation of a small piece of
such an organizing centre into an ectopic position can
change the fate of the surrounding tissue : these cells are
then instructed to form those structures that are induced

2

in the normal neighborhood of such an organizing re-
gion. Based on these observations, Wolpert (1969) has
worked out the concept of positional information. The lo-
cal concentration of a substance that is distributed in a
graded fashion dictates the direction in which a group of
cells has to develop. The organizing region is thought
to be the source of such a morphogenetic substance. A
famous example is the determination of the digits in the
chick wing bud (Cooke and Summerbell, 1980 ; Tickle,
1981). It occurs under control of a small nest of cells lo-
cated at the posterior border of the wing bud, the zone
of polarizing activity (ZPA). The results nicely ﬁt with
the assumption of some hypothetical substance diffus-
ing out of the ZPA and producing a concentration gradi-
ent ; groups of cells form the correct digit by measuring
the local concentration within this gradient (Summerbell,
1974 ; Wolpert and Hornbruch, 1981). Many experiments
in which a second ZPA is implanted at various positions
of the wing bud conﬁrm this conjecture : supernumer-
ary digits are then formed at abnormal positions but in
accordance with the pattern predicted by the assumed
gradient produced by the two ZPA. A possible candidate
for the morphogenetic substance is retinoic acid (Thaller
and Eichele, 1987, 1988).
Indeed, small beets soaked
with this substance at low concentrations mimic all the
effects of a ZPA.

Nowadays there is a growing body of evidence that
chemical gradients play a key role in pattern formation
and cell differentiation. For instance, it has been ob-
served that the protein bicoid has a graded concentra-
tion distribution in the Drosophila melanogaster embryo ;
it organizes the anterior half of the ﬂy and has been fully
characterized (Driever and N¨usslein-Volhard, 1988 ; Bor-
ing et al., 1993).

In this context, theoretical models have to give satis-

factory answers to the following two questions.

• How can a system give rise and maintain large
scale inhomogeneities like gradients even when
starting from initially more or less homogeneous
conditions ?

• How do cells measure the local concentration in
order to interpret their position in a gradient and
choose the corresponding developmental path-
way ?

The next two sections are devoted to the ﬁrst question.
We shall discuss theoretical models having the ability
to produce graded distributions of chemical substances
and present their regulation characteristics.
In the sub-
sequent section, we shall show how to use the positional
information contained in gradients in order to induce a
correct differentiation.

