Vol  18  2014

ANALYSIS

275

EdinLR Vol 18 pp 275-279
DOI:  10.3366/elr.2014.0212

Piercing the Corporate Veil:  Prest v Petrodel

Resources Ltd

The  Supreme Court in Prest v  Petrodel Resources Ltd'  has taken  the opportunity  to
restrict the occasions  when the corporate  veil may be lifted.

A.  THE FACTS

A wealthy Nigerian oil-trader, Michael Prest,2  divorced his wife, Yasmin, but refused
to pay  any of the  lump  sum  or maintenance  payments  to which  she was  entitled  in
terms of their divorce.  In the words of Lord Sumption,  "the husband's  conduct of the
proceedings has been characterised by persistent obstruction, obfuscation  and deceit,
and  a contumelious  refusal to comply with rules of court and specific orders."  Prest
was formerly  an executive with the colourful  oil trader, Marc  Rich, who  died in 2013,
having spent many years  on the  run from the American  courts for sanctions-busting
and  tax evasion.
When the enforcement proceedings relating to the divorce settlement were being
heard  in  the  lower courts,  Moylan  J used  his  powers  under  sections  23-25  of the
Matrimonial  Causes  Act  1973 to order  that Prest  should procure  the conveyance  of
the  matrimonial home  to his  ex-wife  and make  various  other payments.  In addition
Moylan  J  ordered  the  transfer  of seven  UK  properties,  legally  owned  by  British
companies  that  Prest  controlled,  to  Prest's  ex-wife  in  partial  satisfaction  of a  lump
sum  order. The judge  directed those  companies to execute  such  documents as would
give  effect  to the  transfer  of the  properties  to  her. The transfer  of the  matrimonial
home  took place  but the  decision  relating to  the  seven  properties  was  appealed  by
the companies  that Prest controlled. They sought to set aside the judge's order on the
grounds  that the judge had no jurisdiction  to make  such  an  order. The decision was
appealed to the Supreme  Court.

All  the Justices of the Supreme  Court clearly thought that Prest should be  made  to
pay the  sums  due under  the divorce  settlement and  Lord Sumption  found  a way  to

B.  THE DECISION

1  [2013]  UKSC  34, [2013]  2 AC 415.
2  Details  of  Prest s  background  and  his  business  career, 

in  his  own  words,  may  be  found
at  http://powerlistfoundation.org.uk/about-us/trustees/item/38-michael-j-prest. Another  view  of  his
business activities  (and indeed Marc Rich's)  maybe found at http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2005-
07-17/the-rich-boys.

3  Prest at para  4.

276

THE  EDINBURGH  LAW  REVIEW

Vol 18  2014

do so.  The  companies  that Prest controlled,  and which  owned the  seven properties,
had been  in  existence  for  some years  and  in  some  cases  had  owned  the properties
before  Prest's  marriage. There was no suggestion that the companies  had been set up
as  a  method of avoiding any legal obligations  or that the companies  were  being run
dishonestly. While  Lord  Sumption  may have  wished  to pierce  their  corporate  veils
to make  the companies  transfer  the properties he felt unable to  do so because  there
had been  no  attempt to  hide  anything.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the  companies
were deliberately  set up to evade an obligation or frustrate the operation of law, these
grounds being, in his view, the occasions  when the veil should be pierced.4

Having  failed  in this  respect,  Lord  Sumption  turned  to  section  24  (1)(a)  of the
Matrimonial  Causes Act  1973 which  empowers  a judge  to  make  an  order requiring
one  party  to  the  marriage  to  transfer  to  the  other  "property  to  which  the  first-
mentioned party  is  entitled, either  in possession  or reversion".  Moylan  J had  made
an  order  under  that  section  requiring  the  companies  to  transfer  the  properties  on
the grounds that, since Prest had the effective control of the companies,  he was in the
same position as he would have been if he were the beneficiary of a bare trust or if the
companies were his nominees.'  The effect of Moylan J's assumption was to disregard
the corporate  veil  in the context  of matrimonial  disputes  and specifically when  one
party had control of a company. Lord Sumption  indicated that there were  no special
virtues  applicable  to  the  Matrimonial  Causes  Act  1973 which  allowed company law
matters in matrimonial disputes to be treated any differently from any other company
law matters.'  Merely because  someone  has control of a company does not mean that
that person  is  the  beneficial  owner  of the  company's  assets.'  If the  controller  of a
company were  deemed  to be  the  beneficial  owner  of his  company's  assets it  could
mean that  an honest  controller, who  had respected  the  separate  legal personality of
the company, could find himself the beneficial owner of his company's assets when he
had no intention  of being in that position. 8
Moylan J may have  erred on the  corporate  veil point, but an  order under  section
24(l)(a) was  still possible  if Prest could be found to be "entitled, either in possession
or reversion"  to  the  properties.  Lord  Sumption  held that  the  properties  owned by
the companies were indeed owned beneficially by Prest by means of a resulting trust,
rather than by piercing the corporate  veil.
A  resulting trust  is  a  specific  term  of English  law. "Resulting"  in this  context  is
from the  Latin resultare, to  spring back, meaning  that under  certain circumstances
a transfer  may not be  seen  as final  and,  despite  the transferee's  apparent ownership
of the  asset,  the ownership  "springs  back" to  the transferor.  A  common  example  is
when  an  asset  is transferred  to another  person  or company for a particular  purpose
but  that  purpose  is  not  the  one  for which  that the  asset  is  used  or the  purpose  is
impossible to fulfil.  The transferee  only  holds  the asset  as  a resulting trustee for the
transferor who  is the  beneficial  owner  of the  asset  and  in these  circumstances  the

4  Prest at para 36.
5  Para 39.
6  Para 40.
7  Para 41.
8  Para 42.

