502

B H A B H A, H O M I

reﬁned this picture, placing less emphasis
on the requirement of systematicity (con-
cepts are “miniature theories” [2006: xxii])
and by arguing that the relationship be-
tween concept and object is, at root, met-
aphorical. A metaphor asks us to compare
two terms according to a ground, and this
has several consequences:
it brings out
something both new and speciﬁc in the
objects compared and it places them in
new frames of references. In the same
way, theoretical concepts are not meant
to coincide with the object they help de-
scribe. They pull out new aspects of the
object and introduce it into a new frame of
reference (Bal 1994). By insisting on the
generality of concepts and their heuristic
rather than representative function, Bal is
able to treat concepts as speciﬁc but at the
same time nomadic, capable of “traveling”
from one discipline to another (2002).

SEE ALSO: Cultural Studies; Genette,
Gerard; Narratology and Structuralism

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READING

Bal, M. (1985). Narratology: Introduction to the
Theory of Narrative (trans. C. van Boheemen).
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Bal, M. (1991). Reading Rembrandt: Beyond the
Word–Image Opposition. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Bal, M. (1994). Scared to death. In M. Bal & I. E.
Boer (eds.), The Point of Theory: Practices of
Cultural Analysis. New York: Continuum.

Bal, M. (1999a). Introduction. In The Practice
of Cultural Analysis: Exposing Interdisciplinary
Interpretation. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.

Bal, M. (1999b). Memories in the museum: Pre-
posterous histories for today. In Acts of Memory:
Cultural Recall in the Present. Hanover, NH:
University Press of New England.

Bal, M. (1999c). Quoting Caravaggio: Contemporary
Art, Preposterous History. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Bal, M. (2002). Travelling Concepts in the Human-
ities: A Rough Guide. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.

Bal, M. (2006). A Mieke Bal Reader. Chicago: Uni-

versity of Chicago Press.

Cherry, D. (ed.) (2008). About Mieke Bal. Oxford:

Wiley-Blackwell.

Genette, G. (1980). Narrative Discourse: An Essay in
Method (trans. J. E. Lewin). Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.

Silverman, K. (2008). Je vous. In D. Cherry (ed.),

About Mieke Bal. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Bhabha, Homi
ANKHI MUKHERJEE

Homi K. Bhabha is a foundational ﬁgure
for postcolonial theory. He was born in
Bombay, India, in 1949, educated at the
University of Bombay and Christ Church,
Oxford, and is at present Professor of the
Humanities in the Department of English
and American Literature
at Harvard
University.

Bhabha’s most signiﬁcant book, arguably,
is The Location of Culture, a collection of
writings published in 1994, which includes
deﬁnitive versions of his inﬂuential essays
“The other question,” “Of mimicry and
man,” “Signs taken for wonders,” and
“DissemiNation.” Nation and Narration,
edited by Bhabha, is another central text in
his oeuvre, containing a variety of contribu-
tions on national narratives. “Foreword:
Remembering Fanon: Self, psyche, and
the colonial condition,” Bhabha’s 1986
introduction to the Pluto edition of Frantz
Fanon’s Black Skin, White Masks, played a
key role in the 1980s revival of Fanon’s work
and in the resurgence of critical appropria-
tions of Fanon in the academy, which Henry
Louis Gates, Jr., (1991) has termed “critical
Fanonism.” Bhabha is also the author of
several inﬂuential critical articles, such as
“At the Limits” (1989), a commentary on
the aftermath of Salman Rushdie’s Satanic
Verses, “Queen’s English” (1997), a study of

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

hybridized speech,
“Cosmopolitanisms”
(2000),onthepluralisticnatureofcosmopol-
itanism, and “Adagio” (2005), a reﬂection on
the legacy of Edward Said.

Bhabha’s work has provided many valu-
able conceptual leads and catchphrases to
postcolonial theory: nation and narration,
anticolonial agency, third space or the place
of hybridity, ambivalence and uncanny
doubles, mimicry, pedagogic and performa-
tive nationality. Bhabha formulates a post-
colonial method that draws on high Euro-
pean theory – Sigmund Freud and Jacques
Lacan, Hannah Arendt, M. M. Bakhtin,
Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault,
to
name the major inﬂuences – and teases
and tests it in reappraisals of the phenom-
enon of colonialism and the quandaries
of the postcolonial condition. Bhabha’s the-
oretical formulations engage with literary
texts (by Joseph Conrad, Henry James, V. S.
Naipaul, Salman Rushdie, Toni Morrison,
for example) as well as nonﬁction writings
by J. S. Mill, Frantz Fanon, and Charles
Taylor. Bhabha writes in an eloquent and
sometimes difﬁcult style, and famously won
the runner-up award in the 1998 “Bad
Writing Competition” (from the journal
Philosophy and Literature) for a line from
The Location of Culture.

In “Signs taken for wonders,” Bhabha
examines the role of the English book in
the perpetuation of English cultural rule.
Bhabha argues that the fetishized English
book – the sign taken for wonders, whether
it is the Bible or a canonical text – is a site of
colonial ambivalence. Bhabha provides
two distinct and seemingly contradictory
accounts of this ambivalence or “splitting”
of the voice of authority. He argues that it is
a constitutional undecidability in the very
edicts of Englishness that makes possible
anticolonial and postcolonial intervention
and subversion: the colonized disarticulate
the voice of the colonizer at the very point of
its splitting. He also suggests, however, that

B H A B H A , H O M I 503

colonial ambivalence is invented when mas-
ter texts are subjected to acts of repetition in
the “dark unruly spaces of the earth.” In “Of
mimicry and man: The ambivalence of co-
lonial discourse,” Bhabha outlines his view
of colonial mimicry as a discursive opera-
tion in which the excess produced by the
ambivalence of mimicry – “almost the same,
but not quite” – serves to undermine and
make uncertain the totalizing discourses of
the colonial system. Mimicry, Bhabha says,
works like camouﬂage, not a repression of
difference, but a form of resemblance that
defers presence by displaying it partially and
metonymically. Through his conceptualiza-
tion of mimicry, Bhabha problematizes the
old colonial relationship between a mono-
lithic power and its faceless victims. Bhabha
suggests instead that the colonial presence is
always ambivalent, split between its appear-
ance as deliberative and its articulation as
repetition and difference. Bhabha illustrates
this process by ﬁrst noting the fetishistic
marks of European cultural and disciplinary
presence in the space of
the colony –
cricket ﬁelds, European clubs, colonial
courts, theaters, mock Etons, the English
book. The function of these “transparencies
of authority,” as Bhabha terms them, is not
to satisfy the demands of European nostal-
gia but to exert a normalizing inﬂuence over
the native, to re-form the African or Indian
as a copy of
the displaced European
“original.” This double exercise of power,
which acts to authorize the European and
civilize the native, gives rise to mimicry.
The colonial disciplinary regime fails to
produce allegories of Englishness and pro-
duces instability and hybridity instead,
and colonial subjects “who are almost the
same, but not quite, not white,” “less than
one and double.” The colonist’s identity is
jeopardized by the emergence of the sup-
plement and the counterfeit. The identity
of the colonized, in turn, is not simply a
mimesis of the European original, but a

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

