Edgar Allan Poe. “Critical Notices.” Southern Literary Messenger 2 (1836): 659-662.  

 

∞∞∞∞∞∞∞  

 

CRITICAL NOTICES.  

PHILOTHEA.  

Philothea:. Romance. By Mrs. Child, author of the Mother’s Book, &c. Boston: Otis, 
Broaders, Co. New York: George Dearborn.  

Mrs. Child is well known as the author of “Hobomok,” “The American Frugal Housewife,” 
and the “Mother’s Book.” She is also the editor of a “Juvenile Miscellany.” The work before 
us is of a character very distinct from that of any of these publications, and places the fair 
writer in a new and most favorable light. Philothea is of that class of works of which the 
Telemachus of Fenelon, and the Anarchlarsis of Barthelemi, are the most favorable 
specimens. Overwhelmed in a long-continued inundation of second-hand airs and ignorance, 
done up in green muslin, we turn to these pure and quiet pages with that species of gasping 
satisfaction with which a drowning man clutches the shore.  

The plot of Philothea is simple. The scene is principally in ancient Athens, during the 
administration of Pericles; and some of the chief personages of his time are brought, with 
himself, upon the stage. Among these are Aspasia, Alcibiades, Hippocrates, Anaxagoras of 
Clazomenæ, Plato, Hermippus the comic writer, Phidias the Sculptor, Artaxerxes of Persia, 
and Xerxes his son. Philothea, the heroine of the tale, and the grand daughter of Anaxagoras, 
is of a majestic beauty, of great purity and elevation of mind. Her friend, Etidora, of a more 
delicate loveliness, and more flexile disposition, is the adopted daughter of Phidias, who 
bought her, when an infant, of a goat-herd in Phelle — herself and nurse having been stolen 
from the Ionian coast by Greek pirates, the nurse sold into slavery, and the child delivered to 
the care of the goat-herd. The ladies, of course, have lovers. Eudora is betrothed to Philæmon. 
This Athenian, the son of the wealthy Cherilaus, but whose mother was born in Corinth, has 
incurred the dislike of Aspasia, the wife of Pericles. She procures the revival of an ancient law 
subjecting to a heavy fine all citizens who married foreigners, and declaring all persons, 
whose parents were not both Athenians, incapable of voting in the public assemblies or of 
inheriting the estates of their fathers. Philæmon, thus deprived of citizenship, prevented from 
holding office, and without hope of any patrimony, is obliged to postpone, indefinitely, his 
union with Eudora. The revisal of the obnoxious law has also a disastrous effect upon the 
interests of Philothea. She is beloved of Paralus, the son of Pericles, and returns his affection. 
But in marrying, she will bring upon him losses and degradation. Pericles, too, looks with an 
evil eye upon her poverty, and the idea of marriage is therefore finally abandoned.  

Matters are thus situated, when Philothea, being appointed one of the Canephoræ, (whose 
duty it is to embroider the sacred peplus, and to carry baskets in the procession of the 
Panathenaia,) is rigidly secluded by law, for six months, within the walls of the Acropolis. 
During this time, Eudora, deprived of the good counsel and example of her friend, becomes a 
frequent visitor at the house of Aspasia, by whose pernicious influence she is insensibly 

affected. It is at the return of Philothea from the Acropolis that the story commences. At the 
urgent solicitation of Aspasia, who is desirous of strengthening her influence in Athens by the 
countenance of the virtuous, Anaxagoras is induced to attend, with his grand-daughter, a 
symposium at the house of Pericles. Eudora accompanies them. The other guests are 
Hermippus, Phidias, the Persian Artaphernes, Tithonus a learned Ethiopian, Plato, Hipparete 
the wife of Alcibiades, and Alcibiades himself. At this symposium Eudora is dazzled by the 
graces of Alcibiades, and listens to his seductive flattery — forgetful of the claims of 
Hipparete, the wife of Alcibiades, and of Philrmon, her own lover. The poison of this illicit 
feeling now affects all the action of the drama. Philothea discovers the danger of her friend, 
but is sternly repulsed upon the proffer of good advice. Alcibiades is appointed a secret 
interview by Endora, which is interrupted by Philothea — not however before it is observed 
by Philetmon, who, in consequence, abandons his mistress, and departs, broken-hearted, from 
Athens. The eyes of Eudora are now opened, too late, to the perfidy of Alcibiades, who had 
deceived her with the promise of marriage, and of obtaining a divorce from Hipporete. It is 
Hipparete who appeals to the Archons for a divorce from Alcibiades, on the score of 
[page 660:] his notorious profligacy; and, in the investigations which ensue, it appears that a 
snare has been laid by Aspasia and himself, to entrap Eudora, and that, with a similar end in 
view, he has also promised marriage to Electra, the Corinthian.  

Pericles seeks to please the populace by diminishing the power of the Areopagus. He causes a 
decree to be passed, that those who denied the existence of the Gods, or introduced new 
opinions about celestial things, should be tried by the people. This, however, proves injurious 
to some of his own personal friends. Hermippus lays before the Thesmothetme Archons an 
accusation of blasphemny against Anaxagoras, Phidias, and Aspasia; and the case is tried 
before the fourth assembly of the people. Anaxanoras is charged with not having offered 
victims to tihe Gods, and with having blasphemed the divine Phoebus, by saying the sun was 
only a huge ball of fire,-and is condemned to die. Phlidias is accused of blasphemy, in having 
carved the likeness of himself and Pericles on the shield of heaven-born Pallas, of having said 
that he approved the worship of the Gods merely becatise he wished to have his own works 
adored, and of decoying to his own house the maids and matrons of Athens, under the 
pretence of seeing sculpture, but in fact, to administer to the profligacy of Pericles. He is also 
adjudged to death. Aspasia is accused of saying that the sacred baskets of Demeter contained 
nothing of so much importance as the beautiful maidens who carried them; and that the 
temple of Poseidon was enriched with no offerings from those who had been wrecked, 
notwithstanding their supplications-thereby implying ir-reverent doubts of the power of 
Ocean’s God. Her sentence is exile. Pericles, however, succeeds in getting the execution of 
the decrees suspended until the oracle of Amphiaraus can be consulted. Antiphon, a 
celebrated diviner, is appointed to consult it. He is absent for many days, and in the meantime 
Pericles ha.s an opportunity of tampering wvith the people, as he has already done with 
Antiphon. The response of the oracle opportunely declares that the sentences be reconsidered. 
It is done — Phidias and Anaxagoras are merely banished, while Aspasia is acquitted. These 
trials form perhaps the most interesting portion of the book.  

Chapter XI introduces us to Anaxagoras, the conterited resident of a small village near 
Lampsacus in Ionia. He is old, feeble, and in poverty. Philothea watches by his side, and 
supports him with the labor of her hands. Plato visits the sage of Clazomenwe in his retreat, 
and brings news of the still-beloved Athens. The pestilence is raging — the Pirwus is heaped 
with unburied dead. Hipparete has fallen a victim. Peri cles was one of the first sufferers, but 
has recovered through the skill of Hippocrates. Phidias who, after his sentence of exile, 
departed with Eudora to Elis, and grew in honor among the Eleans-is dead. Eudora still 
remains at his house, Elis having bestowed upon her the yearly revenues of a farm, in 

