 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

Thermal analysis of crystallization and melting  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Dr. G. T. Rengarajan 

Institut für Chemie 

Universitaet Osnabrück 

 
 

Tel.: +49-541-969-2275 

E-mail: gtrichyr@uni-osnabrueck.de 

 
 

1 

1. Differential scanning calorimetry 
 
DCS is a widely used experimental technique to measure thermal and thermodynamic prop-
erties of a wide range of materials. DSC measures heat flow rates to the samples as a func-
tion of the temperature, unlike heat flow itself as in the case of classical calorimetry. To this 
end,  the  heat  flow  to  the  sample  required  maintaining  constant  preset  heating  or  cooling 
rates or the heat flow required to keep the sample temperature constant is measured. There 
are two types of commercially available DSCs, namely 
 

•  heat flux DSCs 
•  power-compensated DSCs 

 

We  will  use  a  Perkin  Elmer  DSC  8500  which  makes  use  of  the  power  compensation  tech-
nique, as discussed in section 1.2. 
 
1.1. Heat flux DSC 
 
Heat flux DSCs contain a heated thermoelectric disk. Sample and reference are placed on the 
thermoelectric  disk  at  their  designated  positions.  The  temperatures  of  the  sample  and  the 
reference  are  measured  constantly  by  thermocouples  placed  directly  beneath  them.  The 
instrumental  signal  is derived  from  the  temperature  difference between sample  and  refer-
ence. Hence, thermal properties of the samples are indirectly acquired.   
 
1.2. Power Compensated DSC 
 
A scheme of a power compensated DSC is shown in Figure 1. The basic setup of the instru-
ment consists of two identical microfurnaces consisting of platinum-iridium alloy.  
 

 

Figure 1. Power-compensated Differential Scanning Calorimeter. 

 
One of the furnaces contains a reference pan with heat capacity C3, while the other furnace 
contains  the  sample  pan  with  heat  capacity  C4.  The  sample  pan  contains  the  sample  to  be 
investigated  with  heat  capacity  CS.  Since  both  the  microfurnaces  and  the  pans  can  be  con-
sidered as being identical, their heat capacities can be considered as being equal: C3 = C4 if T3 
=  T4.    Reference  and  sample  furnaces  are  connected  via  the  heat  resistances  of  reference 
furnace R1 and sample furnace R2 with R2 = R1. The furnaces are separated from each other 

 

2 

