Stuckless, N., The Vengeance Scale: Development of a Measure of Attitudes Toward Revenge , 
Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 7:1 (1992) p.25 

The Vengeance Scale: Development of a Measure 

of Attitudes Toward Revenge 

Noreen Stuckless 
Richard Goranson 

Psychology Department, Yorle University 
North Yorle, Ontario, CanmJa M3J lP3 

Allhough revenge has been implicaled ina broatJ range 0/ antisocialand 
criminal acts, lhere has been liule psychologicaJ research on it. There 
is presently no scale measuring altitudes toward revenge in the pgycho(cid:173)
logicalliteralure. This nudy, involving 600 undergraduates, was de(cid:173)
signet!  to develop  and  validale  such  a  measure.  ScaJe  construction 
procedures were used thaJ took wo consideralion the assessment 01 
validity at all stages 01 scaJe development. The result was a 20 item 
Vengeance SeaJe with a Cronbach's alphIJ 0/ .92. Correlalions ofthe 
Vengeance  Scale with  the validating  measure of Trait Anger and a 
measure 01 empalhy were in lhe moderate range and in the predieted 
direclions .In addition, lhere were high signiftcant eorrelalions between 
lhe Vengeance Scale and self-report measures ofvengeful beh4viors. 
The scale appears tobe minimally contaminatedwith socilll desirability. 
The findings 01 face,  concurrent, and eonstruct validity  altesi to the .. 
valid;ty olthe measure. Test-retest reliability was .90. The Vengeance 
Scale ean provide a useful instrument lor the examination of individual 
differences in response to revenge-eliciting situaJions. 

Revenge is the infliction of harm in return for perceived wrong. It is 
frequently  cited as  a motivating  factor in  human  aggression.  Vengeful 
aggression has been implicated in a wide variety of illegal and antisocial 
acts  including  arson  (0' Sullivan  &  Kelleher,  1987),  rape  (ScuUy  & 
Marolla,  1985),  assault  (Ney,  1987),  vandalism  (WiesenthaI,  1990), 
homicide (porporino, Doherty & Sawatsky, 1987), shoplifting (Turner & 
Cashdon, 1988), and employee theft{Terris & Jones, 1982). Despite this, 
there is little psychological research on vengeance per se. Moreover, there 
presently  is  no  se ale  in  the  literature  to  measure  attitudes .toward  the 

Author3' Notes: This research was funded in part by the canadian Federation of University 
Women's Beverley Jackson Fellowship awarded to the tirst author. 
The authors thank Dr. Clary Lay aod Dr. Gonion Flett for their comments on earlier drafts 
of this paper. 
Requests for reprints should be sent to the second author. 
JournalolSocialBehaviorandPersoMlity, 1992, Vol. 7,No.l,2S-42. 
el992 Select Press 

Copyright (c) 2007 Pro Quest LLC 
Copyright (c) Select Press 

Stuckless, N., The Vengeance Scale: Development of a Measure of Attitudes Toward Revenge , 
Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 7:1 (1992) p.25 

26 

JOURNAL OF SOCIAL BEHAVIOR AND PERSONALITY 

appropriateness of taking  vengeful  action.  Tbe  purpose of the  present 
research was to develop such a scale. 

Tbe perspective on revenge in the psychologicalliterature centers on 
revenge as a motivating factor in human aggressions rather than on the 
concept of revenge itself. Tbe terms revenge and vengeance are not even 
designated as keywords in the American Psychological Abstracts, but are 
subsumed under the classification of reciprocity. Responses to harmful 
acts are typically considered in the context of tit for tat reciprocity or as 
retaliation (Axe~ 1984). However, revenge differs conceptually from 
both reciprocity and retaliation  in  several key respects.  lbe following 
examination of the concept of vengeance seeks to provide the defming 
characteristics of revenge and to indicate the ditlerences between revenge, 
retaliation, hostility, reciprocity, and retribution. 

Tbe vengeful act is essentially personal (Bar-Elli & Heyd, 1986) and 
is usually committed after a period of reflecting on harm done to oneself. 
Buss (1961) indicates that revenge is typica1ly an intense form of aggres(cid:173)
sion  that  results  when  the  avenger  has  bad  a  chance  to  "mull  over 
rejections, attacks and disappointments" (p.1S). In contrast, "retaliation" 
can  be  seen  as  having  the  primary  pwpose of deterrence.  It does not 
necessarily involve affect and it is basically rational in its intent. It is often 
immediate (the quickness of response being useful to convey the contin(cid:173)
gency to the original harmdoer). "Revenge," on the other band, has the 
essential purpose of giving the avenger relief from a feeling of discomfort 
(often anger). It is not necessarily rational. Although it may incidentally 
deter future aggression, often this is not the case since the avenger may act 
anonymously, or the vengeful act itself may provoke further aggressive 
reaction. 

Acts  of retribution düfer from  acts of vengeance  in that they  are 
sanctioned by the state (Oldenquist, 1988), and in that they are limited in 
theirintensity (Henberg, 1990). In general, vengefulresponses are typically 
of greaterintensity than their provocation (Marongiu & Newman, 1987). 
Tbere are also clear indications of anger inherent in vengeful aggressive 
responses  (Buss,  1961).  Revenge  düfers  from  general hostility (Buss, 
1961) in that the justification and motivation for vengeful aggressive acts 
rests  on  the  perception  of  having  being  wronged,  rather  than 
undifferentiated feelings of hostility toward others. 

While there often is disapproval ofthose who seekrevenge, vengeance 
is neither universa1ly condemned nor condoned (Daly & Wilson,  1988; 
Jacoby, 1986). Fromm (1983) argues that vengeance is a malignant, but 
typically human behaviour, and that it differs from the notmal defensive 
aggression  common  in  most  species.  Marongiu  and  Newman  (1987) 
CODCur  with  Fromm's  argument  that vengeance  is  a  universal  human 

Copyright (c) 2007 Pro Quest LLC 
Copyright (c) Select Press 

