Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726
DOI 10.1007/s11002-014-9294-1

Drink coca-cola, eat popcorn, and choose powerade:
testing the limits of subliminal persuasion

Laura Smarandescu & Terence A. Shimp

Published online: 14 May 2014
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract Research by marketing/advertising scholars has yielded anything but defin-
itive results when testing whether subliminal advertising is capable of persuading
consumers. Recent research in social cognition has provided impressive evidence that
subliminally priming brand names affects individuals’ attitudes, choices, and behaviors.
In the spirit of replication and boundary-condition testing, we conducted three studies
to examine whether subliminally priming brand names remains successful under more
realistic marketplace conditions. Study 1 pits an underdog brand against a market share
leader and demonstrates that subliminal priming significantly influences purchase
intentions when consumers are in an active thirst state. Study 2 examines the boundary
conditions of this effect on brand choice in a simulated store environment and also
obtains a significant priming effect when consumers are in an active thirst state.
However, this effect is nullified in study 3 that is structurally parallel to study 2 but
which adds a 15-min time delay between the prime and the choice task. The resultant
null effect questions the ability of subliminal priming to persuade consumers under
more realistic marketplace conditions.

Keywords Subliminal advertising . Priming . Persuasion . Motivation . Replication .
Boundary-condition testing

1 Introduction

The interrelated topics of subliminal perception, subliminal persuasion, and subliminal
advertising have long intrigued, provoked, and concerned all parties interested in
advertising and its impact—practitioners, the general public, policy makers, and
scholars. By way of distinction, subliminal perception refers to the awareness of stimuli

L. Smarandescu (*)
Iowa State University, 2350 Gerdin Building, Ames, IA 50011, USA
e-mail: smarand@iastate.edu

T. A. Shimp
Moore School of Business, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA

716

Mark Lett (2015) 26:715–726

presented at a speed or visual level that is below the conscious threshold, whereas
subliminal persuasion necessitates that the subliminally presented stimuli have some
effect on individuals’ attitudes or behaviors (Epley et al. 1999).

Subliminal persuasion and its advertising counterpart are of great concern given
the chilling implication that consumer behavior could be influenced surreptitiously.
The original outcry occurred over 50 years ago in response to a researcher, James
Vicary, who claimed to have increased the sales of Coca-Cola and popcorn in a
New Jersey movie theater by using the subliminal message: “Drink Coca-Cola, and
Hungry? Eat popcorn.” (Block and Vanden Bergh 1985). This message was
supposedly flashed for 1/3,000 of a second at 5-s intervals. Though Vicary’s
research is scientifically meaningless (he failed to use proper experimental proce-
dures), the topic of subliminal persuasion has since fostered considerable scholarly
research. Marketing and advertising scholars conducted the initial research, follow-
ed more recently by fine-tuned testing by psychologists using priming procedures.
The following sections provide reviews of select studies from both research
traditions.

2 Review of investigations by marketing/advertising researchers

Cuperfain and Clarke (1985) found mixed results for subliminal persuasion when
testing brands that varied in familiarity to consumers. Participants were exposed to a
subliminal message that lasted for 1/60th of a second, a considerably longer duration
than is used in more current subliminal priming research. Cuperfain and Clarke’s
(1985) results were mixed as to whether subliminal stimuli are capable of affecting
brand preferences: a significant effect materialized for the established brand but not for
the relatively unknown brand.

Hawkins (1970) detected increased thirst ratings in participants after they had been
exposed to the word Coke that had been presented to them subliminally for 2.7 milli-
seconds (ms) on 40 occasions. Beatty and Hawkins’ (1989) attempted to replicate
Hawkins’ (1970) finding by presenting a group of participants with the same subliminal
stimulus (COKE) versus a control group exposed to nonsense letters (NYTP).
Obtaining a null effect, they concluded that Hawkins (1970) likely detected a statisti-
cally significant effect due to Type I error. Beatty and Hawkins (1989) acknowledged
that the amount of time for presenting the subliminal stimulus that they used—also
2.7 ms—was perhaps too short to impact participants’ thirst ratings.

2.1 Need for additional research

This brief review illustrates that the empirical evidence produced by marketing/
advertising researchers is mixed regarding the effectiveness of subliminal advertising
and leans heavily in the direction of weak or null effects. Recently, the psychology field
has emphasized the strong need for further inquiry in instances where empirical
evidence is ambiguous, and issued a call for boundary testing and replication research
(cf. Fanelli 2012; Francis 2012; Schooler 2011; Simmons et al. 2011). The recent
publication of tests of subliminal persuasion by psychologists using the methodology of
priming provides a springboard for our research wherein we test the boundaries of prior

