Philosophy  and  Phenomenological  Research
Vol.  LXXIII, No. 1, July 2006

Is Incompatibilism Intuitive?

EDDY  NAHMIAS
Georgia State University

STEPHEN  G. MORRIS
Missouri  Western  State  University

THOMAS  NADELHOFFER
Dickinson College

JASON  TURNER
Rutgers University

Incompatibilists  believe  free  will  is  impossible  if  determinism  is  true,  and  they  often
claim  that  this  view  is  supported  by  ordinary  intuitions.  We  challenge  the  claim  that
incompatibilism is intuitive to most  laypersons  and  discuss  the  significance  of  this  chal-
lenge  to  the  free  will  debate.  After  explaining  why  incompatibilists  should  want  their
view  to  accord  with  pretheoretical  intuitions,  we  suggest  that  determining  whether
incompatibilism is in fact intuitive calls for empirical testing. We  then  present  the  results
of our studies, which put  significant  pressure  on  the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is  intui-
tive. Finally, we consider and respond to several potential objections to our approach.

Incompatibilists believe that the freedom associated with moral responsibility
is  impossible  if  determinism is  true,  and  they  often  claim  that  this  is  the
natural view to take given  that  it  is  purportedly supported by  ordinary intui-
tions. In this paper, we challenge the  claim  that  incompatibilism  is  intuitive
to  most  laypersons, and we discuss the  significance of  this  challenge to  the
free will  debate. In  doing so,  we first  argue that  it  is  particularly  important
for incompatibilists  that  their view of  free will  is  intuitive  given  that  it  is
more metaphysically demanding than compatibilist alternatives (§1). We then
suggest  that  determining whether incompatibilism  is  in  fact  intuitive  calls
for empirical testing  of  pretheoretical  judgments  about  relevant  cases  (§2).
We therefore carried out  some  empirical studies of  our  own,  and  the  results
put significant pressure on the claim that  incompatibilism  is  intuitive  to  the
majority of  laypersons (§3).  Having examined the  relevant data, we consider
several potential  objections  to  our  approach and show  why  they  fail  to  get
incompatibilists  off the  hook  (§4).  We conclude that  while  our  preliminary
data suggest that incompatibilism is not as intuitive  as  incompatibilists  have

28    EDDY  NAHMIAS, STEPHEN  G. MORRIS, THOMAS  NADELHOFFER, JASON  TURNER

traditionally  assumed,  more  work  should  be  done  both  to  determine  what
ordinary intuitions about free will and moral responsibility actually are and to
understand what role these intuitions should play in the free will debate.

1. Why it matters whether incompatibilism is intuitive

By calling  the  free will  debate “the problem of  free  will  and  determinism,”
philosophers  have  traditionally  assumed  that  there  is  a  problem  with  the
compatibility of free will and determinism unless and until  proven otherwise.
Accordingly,  incompatibilists  commonly  lay  claim  to  having  the  default
position,  with  the  two  alternatives being  either that  we have  free  will—the
libertarian view—or that we do not—the hard determinist (or skeptical) view.
Carving out the philosophical territory in this way seems  to  place the  burden
of proof on compatibilists to provide an  argument to  show  why  what clearly
seems to be a problem is not really a problem.  Incompatibilists  suggest  that
such  attempts  to  analyze freedom along  compatibilist  lines  betray  common
sense and fail to satisfy the intuitions  of  ordinary people.  For  instance,  Rob-
ert Kane writes,

In  my  experience,  most  ordinary  persons  start  out  as  natural  incompatibilists.  They  believe
there is  some  kind  of  conflict  between  freedom  and  determinism;  and  the  idea  that  freedom
and responsibility might be compatible with determinism looks to them  at  first  like  a  ‘quagmire
of evasion’ (William James)  or  ‘a  wretched  subterfuge’  (Immanuel  Kant).  Ordinary  persons
have to be talked out of  this  natural  incompatibilism  by  the  clever  arguments  of  philosophers.
(1999: 217)

Similarly, Laura Ekstrom claims that “we come to the table, nearly  all  of  us,
as  pretheoretic incompatibilists”  (2002:  310).  Galen Strawson  contends  that
the incompatibilist  conception of  free will,  though  impossible  to  satisfy,  is
“just the kind  of  freedom that  most  people ordinarily and unreflectively sup-
pose  themselves to  possess” (1986:  30),  adding that  it  is  “in  our  nature  to
take determinism to pose a serious problem  for our  notions  of  responsibility
and freedom” (89).  And Thomas  Pink  tells  us  that  “most  of  us  start  off  by
making  an important  assumption  about  freedom. Our freedom of  action,  we
naturally  tend  to  assume,  must  be  incompatible  with  our  actions  being
determined” (2004: 12).1 On this view, because most  people purportedly have
the  intuition  that  determinism  conflicts  with  free  will,  any  conception  of
freedom that does not require the falsity of determinism for agents to  count  as
free and morally responsible is bound to be an evasion of—not  a solution  to
—the problem. But are incompatibilists justified in assuming  that  the  major-
ity of laypersons share their own incompatibilist intuitions about free will?

                                                                                                        
1
See also Smilansky (2003: 259),  Pereboom  (2001:  xvi),  O’Connor  (2000:  4),  and  Camp-
bell (1951: 451).

IS INCOMPATIBILISM INTUITIVE?    29

