A neural basis for inference in perceptual ambiguity

Philipp Sterzer, and Andreas Kleinschmidt 

PNAS

 2007;104;323-328; originally published online Dec 26, 2006; 

doi:10.1073/pnas.0609006104 

This information is current as of March 2007.
 

Online Information
& Services
 

Supplementary Material
 

References

 

E-mail Alerts

 

Rights & Permissions

 

Reprints

 

Notes:
 

High-resolution figures, a citation map, links to PubMed and Google Scholar,
etc., can be found at: 
www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/104/1/323
 
Supplementary material can be found at: 
www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/0609006104/DC1
 
This article cites 41 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at: 
www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/104/1/323#BIBL
 
This article has been cited by other articles: 
www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/104/1/323#otherarticles
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box
at the top right corner of the article or
To reproduce this article in part (figures, tables) or in entirety, see: 
www.pnas.org/misc/rightperm.shtml
 
To order reprints, see: 
www.pnas.org/misc/reprints.shtml
 

click here

. 

 

A neural basis for inference in perceptual ambiguity

Philipp Sterzer†‡§ and Andreas Kleinschmidt¶㥋**

†Department of Neurology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany; ‡Department of Psychiatry,
Charite´ University Hospital/St Hedwig Hospital, Turmstrasse 21, D-10559 Berlin, Germany; ¶Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´ dicale Unite´
562, Cognitive Neuroimaging, 91401 Orsay Cedex, France, 㛳Commissariat a` l’Energie Atomique, Direction des Sciences du Vivant, De´ partement de Recherche
Me´ dicale, Service Hospitalier Fre´ de´ ric Joliot, Orsay, 91401 Cedex, France; and **Universite´ Paris-Sud, Orsay, 91405, France

Edited by Marcus E. Raichle, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, and approved November 8, 2006 (received for review
October 11, 2006)

When looking at ambiguous visual stimuli, the observer experi-
ences frequent spontaneous transitions between two competing
percepts while physical stimulation remains unchanged. Despite
recent advances in understanding the neural processes underlying
such perceptual rivalry, a key question has remained unresolved:
Does perceptual rivalry result merely from local bistability of
neural activity patterns in sensory stimulus representations, or do
higher-order areas play a causal role by shifting inference and,
thus, initiating perceptual changes? We used functional MRI to
measure brain activity while human observers reported successive
spontaneous changes in perceived direction for an ambiguous
apparent motion stimulus. In a control condition, the individual
sequences of spontaneous perceptual switches during bistability
were replayed by using a disambiguated version of the stimulus.
Greater activations during spontaneous compared with stimulus-
driven switches were observed in inferior frontal cortex bilaterally.
Subsequent chronometric analyses of event-related signal time
courses showed that, relative to activations in motion-sensitive
extrastriate visual cortex, right inferior frontal cortex activation
occurred earlier during spontaneous than during stimulus-driven
perceptual changes. The temporal precedence of right inferior
frontal activations suggests that this region participates in initiat-
ing spontaneous switches in perception during constant physical
stimulation. Our ﬁndings can thus be seen as a signature of when
and where the brain ‘‘makes up its mind’’ about competing
perceptual interpretations of a given sensory input pattern.

apparent motion 兩 bistable perception 兩 functional MRI

We usually experience our perception of the visual world as

unitary and stable even though the information available
to our brains is often noisy or ambiguous. How does the brain
nonetheless ‘‘make sense’’ of this information? From a theoret-
ical perspective, translating the images cast onto the retina into
meaningful percepts can be addressed as an inference problem,
but related neurophysiological evidence is sparse (1). This need
for inference is best illustrated by ambiguous stimuli as the
Necker cube or the apparent motion quartet (2, 3) (Fig. 1), where
perception typically fluctuates spontaneously between two mu-
tually exclusive interpretations of the same sensory input. Such
bistable perception is paralleled by activity changes in separate
neuronal populations that represent one or the other perceptual
interpretation (4), but what causes the change to occur in the first
place remains unclear. In binocular rivalry, where discrepant
information is presented to the two eyes, neural activity at the
earliest visual processing stages correlates with spontaneous
perceptual fluctuations (5–9), suggesting a ‘‘gate-keeping’’ func-
tion of these structures in visual awareness. Alternatively, per-
ceptual changes could be initiated by a higher-level process that,
by way of inference, can stabilize, bias, or topple the current
interpretation of the sensory input (10, 11).

These two scenarios differ in the causal chain assumed to
underlie changes in visual awareness, but it remains difficult to
infer causality from correlative neurophysiological measures.
Still, temporal precedence is generally considered good evidence
in favor of a putative causal role (12). Invasive neurophysiolog-

ical recordings would therefore appear ideally suited to resolve
this question but suffer from the uncertainty of where exactly to
place recording electrodes, for instance, in the frontal lobe.
Functional neuroimaging provides whole-brain coverage and has
indeed shown activations related to perceptual change not only
in visual but also frontal and parietal regions (10, 13–16).
However, the conventional amplitude-based analytical tech-
niques used in these studies could not clarify whether fronto-
parietal regions respond to a feed-forward signal from the
sensory cortex that is driven by perceptual change or whether
these regions generate a feedback signal to the sensory cortex
before perceptual change. Recent novel analytical approaches
have shown that the temporally dispersed neurovascular re-
sponse is reliable enough to resolve latency differences in the
range of a couple of hundreds of milliseconds (17–22). Here, we
used such techniques to analyze the onset latencies of functional
MRI (fMRI) activiations during spontaneous perceptual
changes in bistable apparent motion (rivalry) compared with
stimulus-driven changes in a matched control condition (replay)
where the sequence of reversals as reported in the preceding
rivalry condition was replayed by using a disambiguated version
of the apparent motion quartet (Fig. 1). We hypothesized that a
top-down process, where frontal or parietal regions play a causal
role in initiating perceptual change, should be associated with an
earlier onset of activations in these regions during spontaneous
compared with stimulus-driven perceptual changes, relative to
activations in visual cortex [supporting information (SI) Fig. 5].

Results
We first mapped transient activations that occurred whenever
perception changed, irrespective of whether this happened spon-
taneously during rivalry or in response to a stimulus change
during replay. In our paradigm, change in perception refers to a
change in direction of apparent motion (from vertical to hori-
zontal or vice versa, see Fig. 1), and activation refers to a signal
increase over and above constant ongoing sensory processing. As
reported with similar paradigms (16, 23–25), switch-related
activations occurred at the lateral occipitotemporal junction,
corresponding to the human motion complex (hMT⫹/V5) (Fig.
2A). Additionally and again in accord with previous findings (13,
14, 16), we observed a distributed activation pattern associated
with perceptual switches that included bilateral inferior frontal
lobe regions and the right inferior parietal lobule but also the
calcarine cortex, consistent with early visual areas V1/V2 (see SI

Author contributions: P.S. and A.K. designed research; P.S. performed research; P.S. ana-
lyzed data; and P.S. and A.K. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS direct submission.
Abbreviations: fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; hMT⫹/V5, human motion
complex; BOLD, blood oxygenation level dependent; HRF, hemodynamic response func-
tion; ROI, region of interest.
§To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: philipp.sterzer@charite.de.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/
0609006104/DC1.
© 2006 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA

E
C
N
E
I
C
S
O
R
U
E
N

www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.0609006104

PNAS 兩

January 2, 2007 兩 vol. 104 兩 no. 1 兩 323–328

