Psychological Review
2002, Vol. 109, No. 4, 646 – 678

Copyright 2002 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0033-295X/02/$5.00 DOI: 10.1037//0033-295X.109.4.646

Conditionals: A Theory of Meaning, Pragmatics, and Inference

P. N. Johnson-Laird

Princeton University

Ruth M. J. Byrne
University of Dublin

The authors outline a theory of conditionals of the form If A then C and If A then possibly C. The 2 sorts
of conditional have separate core meanings that refer to sets of possibilities. Knowledge, pragmatics, and
semantics can modulate these meanings. Modulation can add information about temporal and other
relations between antecedent and consequent. It can also prevent the construction of possibilities to
yield 10 distinct sets of possibilities to which conditionals can refer. The mental representation of a
conditional normally makes explicit only the possibilities in which its antecedent is true, yielding other
possibilities implicitly. Reasoners tend to focus on the explicit possibilities. The theory predicts the major
phenomena of understanding and reasoning with conditionals.

You reason about conditional relations because much of your
knowledge is conditional. If you get caught speeding, then you pay
a fine. If you have an operation, then you need time to recuperate.
If you have money in the bank, then you can cash a check.
Conditional reasoning is a central part of thinking, yet people do
not always reason correctly. The lawyer Jan Schlictmann in a
celebrated trial (see Harr, 1995, pp. 361–362) elicited the follow-
ing information from an expert witness about the source of a
chemical pollutant trichloroethylene (TCE):

P. N. Johnson-Laird, Department of Psychology, Princeton University;
Ruth M. J. Byrne, Department of Psychology, University of Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland.

This research was made possible in part by a grant to P. N. Johnson-
Laird from the National Science Foundation (Grant BCS 0076287) to study
strategies in reasoning. We thank Jon Baron and Ray Nickerson for their
helpful criticisms of an earlier version of this article. We thank Yingrui
Yang for providing technical help and advice, Patricia Barres for carrying
out Experiment 2, Rachel McCloy for carrying out a study of modus
tollens, Dan Zook for writing a preliminary version of the program for
pragmatic modulation, and David Over for engaging in many discussions
of philosophical theories of conditionals. We are also grateful to many
people: Peter Wason, now in retirement, for pioneering the psychological
study of conditionals; Jonathan Evans and David Over for a critique of our
account, which they presented at the Workshop on Mental Models in
Brussels, March 2001, and also for many discussions of conditionals; Luca
Bonatti, the late Martin Braine, Keith Holyoak, Howard Margolis, David
O’Brien, and Lance Rips for their vigorous criticisms of the model theory;
Monica Bucciarelli, Orlando Espino, Vittorio Girotto, Eugenia Goldvarg,
Paolo Legrenzi, Maria Sonino Legrenzi, Juan Garcı´a Madruga, Henry
Markovits, Mary Newsome, Cristina Quelhas, Sergio Moreno Rios, Carlos
Santamarı´a, Fabien Savary, Walter Schaeken, Walter Schroyens, Alessan-
dra Tasso, and Valerie Thompson for their collaboration in studies of
conditional reasoning. We are also grateful to the following individuals for
many useful ideas: Bruno Bara, Victoria Bell, David Green, Uri Hasson,
Mark Keane, Markus Knauff, Jim Kroger, Robert Mackiewicz, Hans-
Georg Neth, Tom Ormerod, Rosemary Stevenson, Dan Sperber, Vladimir
Sloutsky, and Jean-Baptiste van der Henst.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to P. N.
Johnson-Laird, Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Green
Hall, Princeton, New Jersey 08544. E-mail: phil@princeton.edu

If the TCE in the wells had been drawn from out of the river,

then there’d be TCE in the riverbed.
But there isn’t any TCE in the riverbed.

Schlictmann then argued that these premises were consistent with
the proposition that no contamination came from the river. What
he overlooked is that the conclusion is not merely consistent with
the premises but follows necessarily from them. Psychologists
disagree about the cause of such oversights and about conditional
reasoning in general (e.g., Braine & O’Brien, 1998; Cheng &
Holyoak, 1985; Johnson-Laird, 1986; Rips, 1983). Philosophers,
logicians, and linguists also disagree about the meaning of condi-
tionals (Adams, 1975; Lewis, 1973; Stalnaker, 1968). No consen-
sus exists about if.

Our concern is everyday conditionals, including all sentences of
the form If A then C or C if A, where A and C are declarative
clauses. Naive individuals can grasp the meaning of such asser-
tions, and they can use it to reason. The term naive refers here
merely to people who have not studied logic in any depth. In the
1970s, psychologists assumed that such individuals reason using
formal rules of inference like those of a logical calculus. The
challenge was to pin down the particular rules (e.g., Braine, 1978;
Johnson-Laird, 1975; Osherson, 1974 –1976). Such theorizing ne-
glected a discovery made by Wason (1966). Intelligent adults in
his selection task regularly committed a logical error. He laid out
four cards in front of them:

A B 2

3

They knew that each card had a letter on one side and a number on
the other side. He showed them a conditional: If a card has the
letter A on one side then it has the number 2 on the other side.
Their task was to select those cards that had to be turned over to
discover whether the conditional was true or false about the four
cards. Most people selected the A and 2 cards, or the A card alone.
They failed to select the 3 card. However, if the 3 has an A on its
other side, the conditional is false. Indeed, nearly everyone judges
it to be false in this case. Individuals also generate this case when
they are asked to make a conditional false (Oaksford & Stenning,
1992), and they judge that the probability of this case is zero given

646

CONDITIONALS

647

the truth of the conditional (Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, Girotto,
Legrenzi, & Caverni, 1999). When Wason and Shapiro (1971)
changed the assertion to a sensible everyday conditional, many
people made the correct selection. Theories based on formal rules
have difficulty in explaining both the error with neutral condition-
als and its correction with sensible content.

Our theory is not formal. It assumes instead that reasoners use
the meaning of premises, and general knowledge, to imagine the
possibilities under consideration—that is, to construct mental mod-
els of them (see Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Polk & Newell,
1995). Mental models can be constructed from perception, imag-
ination, or the comprehension of discourse. They underlie visual
images, but they can also be abstract, representing situations that
cannot be visualized. Each mental model represents a possibility.
It is akin to a diagram in that its structure is analogous to the
structure of the situation that it represents, unlike, say, the structure
of logical forms used in formal rule theories.

Some sentential connectives such as and and or have logical
meanings that are easy to define. For example, consider the fol-
lowing:

Either the printer is broken or else the cable is disconnected,

but not both.

The truth of an exclusive disjunction such as this one is a function
of the truth of its constituent atomic propositions, that is, those
propositions that contain neither not nor connectives (the printer is
broken, the cable is disconnected). The exclusive disjunction is
true in two cases: first, where it is true that the printer is broken but
false that the cable is disconnected, and, second, where it is false
that the printer is broken but true that the cable is disconnected.
Logicians lay out these conditions in a truth table, as shown in
Table 1, in which we abbreviate the atomic propositions. Each row
in the truth table represents a different possibility. Thus, the first
row represents the possibility in which both the printer is broken
and the cable is disconnected; in this possibility, the exclusive
disjunction is false. The connective and can be defined in an
analogous way. A conjunction of the form A and C is true in just
one row of its truth table, namely, where A is true and C is true, and
it is false in every other case. Those sentential connectives that can
be defined in a truth table are known as truth functional—that is,
their meanings are functions that take the truth values of proposi-
tions as inputs and deliver a truth value as an output. The logic of
these truth-functional meanings is captured in the sentential cal-
culus (see, e.g., Jeffrey, 1981).

Psychological theories based on formal rules (hereinafter rule
theories) and the theory based on mental models (hereinafter the

Table 1
A Truth Table for the Exclusive Disjunction “Either the Printer
Is Broken or Else the Cable is Disconnected”

Printer is broken

Cable is

disconnected

Either printer is broken or else

cable is disconnected

True
True
False
False

True
False
True
False

False
True
True
False

model theory) run in parallel for many aspects of reasoning.
Insofar as both sorts of theory reflect logical principles, however,
they have potential limitations (cf. Sloman, 1996). And at the heart
of these limitations is the vexed question of conditionals. Are they
truth functional or not? The answer is not clear. Some theorists
have argued that conditionals have the same meaning as the
truth-functional connective of material implication (e.g., Grice,
1975; Wilson, 1975), which is shown in Table 2. Other theorists
have rejected this analysis (e.g., Gazdar, 1979; O’Brien, 1999).
The profundity of the puzzle correlates with the length of its
literature. One aim of the present article is to resolve this puzzle.

Simple inferences from conditionals are of four main sorts:
1. Modus ponens:

If there is a circle then there is a triangle.
There is a circle.

⬖ There is a triangle.

2. Modus tollens:

If A then C.
A.
⬖ C.

If there is a circle then there is a triangle.
There is not a triangle.

⬖ There is not a circle.

If A then C.
Not C.
⬖ Not A.

3. Denial of the antecedent:

If there is a circle then there is a triangle.
There is not a circle.

⬖ There is not a triangle.

If A then C.
Not A.
⬖ Not C.

4. Affirmation of the consequent:

If there is a circle then there is a triangle.
There is a triangle.

⬖ There is a circle.

If A then C.
C.
⬖ A.

Modus ponens and modus tollens are valid for both conditionals
and biconditionals (If and only if there is a circle then there is a
triangle), whereas the other two inferences are valid only for
biconditionals. There are more experimental studies of these and
other inferences with if than of any other deductive term (for
reviews, see Baron, 1994; J. Evans, Newstead, & Byrne, 1993;
Garnham & Oakhill, 1994). Likewise, there are probably more
semantic analyses of if than of any other single word in English
(e.g., Harper, Stalnaker, & Pearce, 1981; Jackson, 1987; Lewis,
1973; Traugott, ter Meulen, Reilly, & Ferguson, 1986). Some
authors have despaired of formulating the conditions in which
conditionals are true and have argued instead that they have merely
conditions in which it is justifiable to assert them (see, e.g.,
Adams, 1970, 1975; cf. Lewis, 1976). Such skepticism is in
striking contrast to the ease with which individuals understand
conditionals in daily life and judge them to be true or false.

Our goal is to resolve the problems of conditionals. We there-
fore formulate a theory of the meaning of conditionals, of how this
meaning is modulated by semantics and pragmatics, and of its use
in reasoning. Braine and O’Brien (1991) offered such an account
based on a rule theory. The present article offers an account based
on the model theory. Of course, the model theory has had some-
thing to say about conditionals in the past (e.g., Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1991), but its account was incomplete. Critics have iden-
tified two principal lacunae (see, e.g., Fillenbaum, 1993; Holyoak

