Why interest organizations do what they do:
Assessing the explanatory potential of ‘exchange’
approaches

Joost Berkhout
Department of Political Science, University of Amsterdam, Oudezijds Achterburgwal 237, 1012 DL,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Executive Summary Important parts of the literature on strategies of interest orga-
nizations consider the political activities of interest organizations as serving to build and
maintain exchange relationships between organizational representatives and constituents,
policymakers and the news media. The incentive for organizational survival produces
activities that links social and political domains. This review integrates various strands of
existing thinking on interest groups under an ‘exchange’ perspective. It produces a view
on interest organizations as being strategically strongly constrained through different
demands made on the organization when engaging in relationships with supporters, pol-
icymakers and journalists. While challenging, research designs should account for the
interrelated nature of these relationships rather than treating organizations as a strategi-
cally autonomous actors.
Interest Groups & Advocacy (2013) 2, 227–250. doi:10.1057/iga.2013.6;
published online 23 April 2013

Keywords: political organizations; interest organizations; social movement organiza-
tions; exchange theory; political strategies; lobbying

The online version of this article is available Open Access.

Why do interest organizations do what they do? A number of ‘classic’ and recent studies
evaluate these political activities as exchange relationships of interest organizations
with different parts of the organizational environment (for example, Salisbury, 1969;
Gamson and Wolfsfeld, 1993; Schmitter and Streeck, 1999; Bouwen, 2004). In this
review, I seek to connect the existing ‘exchange-inspired’ thinking on the mobilization
of members, the policy-related activities and outside-oriented strategies. I structure these
studies into a triangular scheme of exchanges by the interest organization with three
types of actors: (i) their supporters, (ii) political institutional actors and (iii) the news
media and other actors related to public opinion. These exchanges are governed by what
I label the logic of support, logic of inﬂuence and the logic of reputation.1

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414

Interest Groups & Advocacy Vol. 2, 2, 227–250

www.palgrave-journals.com/iga/

Berkhout

The contribution of this review is that it explicitly incorporates the news media in
the model, further speciﬁes the supporters and institutional exchange relationships,
and presents the logics in an interrelated manner. First, the exchange relationship of
interest organizations with the news media matters as important channel of interest
group inﬂuence on public opinion, and it matters especially in view of recent
controversy over ‘publicity as a weapon for the weak’ (for example, Thrall, 2006).
Second, it also matters indirectly as it affects the relationships of interest organization
with their constituents and public authorities. By incorporating recent literature on
outside strategies, these relationships are further speciﬁed to account for the effect of
public opinion and news media reporting. Third, exchange relationships with distinct
ﬁelds of actors (supporters, politics, media) tend to be studied independent of each
other. There are small subﬁelds on legislative lobbying, the internal (member) org-
anization of groups or ‘outside-oriented’ strategies. These distinct types of organiza-
tional behavior are strongly interdependent, which makes specialized studies on any
one of them vulnerable to underspeciﬁcation. That is, for instance, opportunities for
legislative lobbying largely depend on public opinion. Parliamentarians are probably
more likely to talk to group representatives when relevant sections of public opinion
are supportive of the cause of the group. Several of such interdependencies are
explicated in the following review and could help in the design of more speciﬁed
models of patterns of behavior of interest organizations.

Furthermore, group scholars have been relatively unsuccessful

in designing
country-comparative research (but see Dür and Mateo, 2013). According to Lowery
et al (2008, p. 1234), this is largely due to a lack of theory ‘that is capable of
encompassing both multiple levels of analysis and variety in contexts in which
phenomena of interest occur’. Although the outline presented here is surely not such
a theory, it may help constructing a meso-level theory that is capable of connecting
country- or
level assumptions by
explicitly labeling contextual constraints and opportunities for certain political
activities.

issue-level

frameworks with organizational

In the following, I ﬁrst provide a behavioral deﬁnition of interest organizations and
differentiate them from political parties and social movements. Then I describe neo-
corporatist thinking on exchange theory and discuss how exchange relationships
shape interest organizations. Third, I assess the literatures bearing on the three logics
of exchange. I conclude with some modest suggestions for improving the study of the
behavior of interest organizations.

Taking the Perspective of the Interest Organization

According to most
researchers, which types of political behavior makes an
organization an ‘interest organization’? First, interests needs to be organized. This
distinguishes interest organizations from broad waves of public opinion, individual

228

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414

Interest Groups & Advocacy Vol. 2, 2, 227–250

