Philos Stud (2015) 172:1243–1263
DOI 10.1007/s11098-014-0347-3

Extending the extended mind: the case for extended
affectivity

Giovanna Colombetti • Tom Roberts

Published online: 24 June 2014
Ó The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract The thesis of the extended mind (ExM) holds that the material under-
pinnings of an individual’s mental states and processes need not be restricted to
those contained within biological boundaries: when conditions are right, material
artefacts can be incorporated by the thinking subject in such a way as to become a
component of her extended mind. Up to this point, the focus of this approach has
been on phenomena of a distinctively cognitive nature, such as states of disposi-
tional belief, and processes of planning and calculation. In this paper, we aim to
expand the scope of ExM by considering the case for extended affectivity. We begin
by clarifying the central commitments of ExM, before investigating its applicability
to a range of affective phenomena, both dispositional and occurrent. We argue that
proponents of ExM should also accept that the vehicles of emotions, moods, sen-
timents, temperaments, and character traits can extend beyond skull and skin.
Keywords Extended mind  Affectivity  Emotion  Mood

1 Introduction

According to the thesis of the extended mind (ExM henceforth), under certain
circumstances we should see the material vehicles that realize the mind as
encompassing not just brain activity, but also that of the body and the material
environment. This ‘‘vehicle externalist’’ thesis was formulated by Clark and
Chalmers (1998) and has been further elaborated by Andy Clark in subsequent
works (e.g., Clark 2003, 2008, 2010a, b), partly in response to critical engagement
by those sympathetic to internalism (for example by Adams and Aizawa 2001,
2010a, b; Rupert 2004; Weiskopf 2008).

G. Colombetti (&)  T. Roberts
Department of Sociology, Philosophy, and Anthropology, University of Exeter, Devon, UK
e-mail: g.colombetti@exeter.ac.uk

123

1244

G. Colombetti, T. Roberts

Due to its focus on beliefs and other cognitive states and processes, ExM is best
known as the hypothesis of extended cognition (HEC; see Rupert 2004). It is not
clear, however, that only states with a distinctively cognitive character fall under the
purview of the theory. Indeed Chalmers (2008, p. xiv), in his foreword to Clark’s
book Supersizing the Mind, remarks in passing that

It is natural to ask whether the extended mind thesis might itself be extended.
What about extended desires, extended reasoning, extended perception,
extended imagination, and extended emotions? I think there is something to be
said for each of these. Perhaps the camera on my iPhone can serve as an
external perceptual mechanism. And perhaps one might have something akin
to an extended mood, if not an extended emotion, when one’s environment is
always nudging one toward happiness or sadness.

Our aim in this paper is to take up this lead and address, speciﬁcally, the question of
whether affectivity can be extended. To anticipate, our answer is that, indeed, it can.
More precisely, we propose that the arguments that have been provided so far to
extend cognitive states apply also to a variety of affective states, such as—as we
shall see—emotions, moods, sentiments, and others. Thus if one buys ExM, or
better HEC, one should also buy HEA—the Hypothesis of Extended Affectivity.

In arguing for this conditional claim, we will not offer a defence of ExM. We are
this
aware that, as mentioned, several criticisms have been raised against
hypothesis, and we suspect that those who are critical of ExM in the ﬁrst place
are likely to be critical of HEA as well. On our part, we are broadly sympathetic to
ExM, and think that most of the critical challenges it has faced have been rebutted
adequately (see Clark 2008, 2010a, b; Hurley 2010). Our most general aim in this
paper, then, is to enrich the debate over ExM further, partly by clarifying its central
commitments and implications, and partly (and more interestingly) by developing it
in a novel context.

To this purpose, we begin with an overview of ExM in Sect. 2, distinguishing in
particular two of its targets: standing dispositional mental states, and temporary,
occurrent cognitive processes. In Sect. 3 we introduce and deﬁne a variety of
affective states as standardly formulated in the philosophy of emotion, again
distinguishing between occurrent and dispositional varieties. In Sect. 4 we argue
that dispositional affective states can be extended, and in Sect. 5 we discuss
occurrent states, arguing that they can also be extended.

2 The extended mind thesis

It is important to distinguish two targets of ExM: (1) standing, enduring mental
states, such as dispositional beliefs; and (2) temporary, ﬂeeting occurrent cognitive
processes, such as calculating a complex sum at a certain moment. ExM is the thesis
that, sometimes, the material vehicles that realize both (1) and (2) extend beyond
skull and skin, into the world. Wilson and Clark (2010) make this point particularly
clearly (see also Sutton 2006). In their view, most of our cognitive extensions
involve ‘‘transient creations, geared towards a speciﬁc purpose’’, which ‘‘combine

123

