The Role and Importance of 

for Chinese Outward Foreign Direct Investments

the Chinese Government

Philippe Gugler, University of Fribourg, Switzerland

Marc Fetscherin, Rollins College, United States

a
CHINESE OUTWARD FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENTS show 
strong positive trend over recent years and have attracted considerable
attention from academia and the business press. Many observers and
commentators express interest in the role the Chinese government
king of Chinese multinational

plays in the activities and decision-ma 

enterprises (MNEs) in connection with their foreign direct investments

(FOi).

. This article makes a contribution by investigating the relationship be-
tween the Chinese .government and MNEs in connection with their
oiJtward foreign direct investment (OFDI). We present a 2x2 matrix
where one dimension includes the interest (high/low) of the Chinese
government and the other the interest of MNEs (high/low). We argue
that, in market-seeking and strategic asset-seeking, bath interests are
aligned and high, while for effcency-seeking' motives Chinese come
pany interests are high but government interests are relatively low. In
regard to resource-seeking motives and balancing foreign currency re-
serves, Chinese government interests are high but company interests
relatively low. Our matrix allows us to understand the role and interests
king procéss as weil as
of the Chinese government in the decision-ma 
the relationships with Chinese companies in outward foreign direct in-
vestments.

Trends and Patterns in Chinese FDI

China's OFDls have shown a strong positive trend over recent years.
At the beginning of the 1990s, outfows were only marginal, at about
US$ 800  million (UNCTAD WIR 2009). But since 2003, Chinese OFOI
has demonstrated impressive growth, increasing from US$ 2.8 billion
in 2003 to US$ 52. billion in 2008 (UNCTAD WIR 2009: 53). However,
DI is c1early accelerating, it is still small by any relative
measure. In 2006, Chinese OFDI accounted for only 1.5 percent of the
ln 2008, China's share of world FOI reached 2.8 percent

while Chinese OF 

worlds total FOI. 

(UNCTAD WIR, 2009).

Most Chinese OFOls are in neighbouring Asian countries, especially

those in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) (MOF-
COM, 2008:67-68). China'sSpecíal Administrative Region, Hong Kong,
attracts by far the highest amount of OFDI. In 2008 it was the preferred
destination of 63 percent of Chinese OFDI (MOFCOM, 2008: 67). A sig-
nificant amount probably constitutes round-tripping investments or
investménts to offshore financial centres or to re-investments back to
China due to favorable tax situations in Hong Kong and other countries.

Therefore, Hong Kong and other offshore financíal centers are transit
points for Chinese ODFI that need ta be factored into the reported sta-
tistics and analyses.

Looking at Chinese FDI in terms of stock flows, leasing and business ser-
vices are the. most popular sectors, accounting for USS 54.5 billion, fol-
lowed by the financial sector (US$ 36.7 billion), wholesale and retailing
(USS 29.8 billion) and mining with US$ 22.8 billion in 2006 (MOFCOM,
2008: 80). The importance of the financíal sector may be i1lustrated by
the fact that, according to MOFCOM(Chinese Ministry of Commerce),
Chinese state-owned commercial banks had established 47 branch of-
fices, 31 affliated institutions and 12 representative offces in 19 coun-
tries in 2006, including the United States, Japan and Great Britarn (MOF-
COM, 2006: 51). Our data for this article are based mostly on offcial data
provided by MOFCOM, but some authors cite a lack of disclosure and
transparency in data sources about Chinese foreign direct investments
(see article from Derek Scissors in this issue).

The best way to understand the strategies of Chinese MNEs is to link
their preferred investment destinations with their maininvestment
sectors since a close relationship exists between the sectoral and geo-
1 ustrates that Chinese
graphical distribution of Chinese OFDI. .FigUre 1 il 
OFDI in the Middle East and Africa targets mainly extractive industries.
According to UNCTAD (2008), the Chinese government supports the
development of Chinese firms' activities in Africa, especially in sec-
tors such as energy and resource exploitation. OFDI in manufacturing
is prevalent in Eastern Europe (especíally transport equipment), Latin
America (mostly heavy industry) and Asia (electronics). Sales, market-
ing and support activities are generally performed in Western European
countries and in North America. International.mergers and acquisitions
are the primary mode of entry of Chinese firms in developed econo-
mies. However, Chinese firms have not yet invested heavily in manufac-
turing and sectors with high added value. As far as production activities,
transport is the key sector in Western Europe, while ICT plays an impor-
tant raie in North America.

Figure 1 suggests that Chinese MNEs follow a regionalization strategy
rather than a global one (Rugman & Doh, 2008: 134 ff.). The 12 larg-
est Chinese firms have the highest average percentage of intraregional
sales and assets. This observation is not specific to Chinese MNEs but
refers to most MNEs as Rugman (2008) found out (see also Sukpanich &
Rugman, 2009). This contrasts with the inference of the press that Chi-
nese OFOI is a global strategy led, or at least influenced, by the govern-
ment.

12

AIB Insights

Vol.  10, No.4

Figure 1: Share of Chinese OFDI in the World

e ~lI.¡.tlllll'¡¡.
'oc of ChIna'. Off 2.79%
ey Ousters ieT, Transport EqUlpment
ey Actlv1es Sfler Marketing, Support

__ -~=-_J

tock of Chlna's oroi

Br _ Virgìn Is.
eaymao Is.

il.05V
5.69% -1

2.07% 1

Manvfi)H:turingg" -

~-'~-_..~~-"'~.~"1
flecron!,s, Heavy Industry . J'

in OFDI. FOI by any Chinese
firm requires approval by the
Chinese authorities, including
MOFCOM, the State Admin-
istration of Foreign Exchange

(SAFE), and the National De-

velopment and Reform Com-
mission (NDRC). Through this
approval process, the Chinese
government ensures that ail
investment activities, even if
executed by privately owned
companies, conform to gov-
ernment policies and goals.

Clearly, this needs to be taken
into consideration when ana-
Iyzing the motivations and
strategies of Chinese MNEs

Source: Own illustration based on MOFCOM, Statistical Bulletin on Chinese OFOI, 2008.

Government Primacy over Foreign Direct Investmel'ts

A number of points need to be raised to outline the relationships be-
tween the Chinese government and the private sector for Chinese
OFOI. For many years, typical private sector business was non-existent
in China. With the economic liberalization and the introduction of pri-
vate ownership in the 1980s, private sector activities took root. They
were partially built on individual entrepreneurial initiatives and state
policies such as the one on privatization (Gugler & Boie, 2009). Some
"national champions'; and most have
companies are identified as future 
aclQse relationship with the government (Morck et aL., 2007). Since the
"going global" strategy adopted by the government at the end of the
1990s, both Chinese State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) and private en-
terprises are engaged in FOI. But most of the large-scale investment
projects that weigh heavily in FOI statistics have so far been executed
by Chinese SOEs. The shares of FOI flows coming from SOEs under the
Central Government in recent years were 73.5 percent (2003),82.3 per-
cent (2004), and 83.2 percent (2005). The remaining shares of FDI flows
are split among investments of SOEs administered by regional govern-
ments, non-SOEs owned collectively, and privately-owned companies.
The success of SOEs abraad is quite Iimited due to their lack of competi-
tiveness and know-how and becausethe acquisitions usually reflect a
political agenda rather than business needs.

Neither the trends nor motives for Chinese OFOI can be understood
without reference to government policies and the raie of the Chinese

government. This is especially true in the 

case of China. China's OFOI
is still highly regulated, even though policies have shifted from pro-
hibition to graduai opening and finally to active promotion, at least
for some SOEs in strategic sectors or industries (Gugler & Boie, 2009:
29-30). Morck et aL. (2007) assessed the connections between govern-
ment and business in China, confirming the government's central raié

Vol.  10, NO.4

investing internationaL. The
following Figure 2 illustrates a
~onceptual framework outlining the interests of the government ver-
sus the interests of Chinese companies. This 2x2matrix maps the four

motives of OF 

DI (market seekers, effciency seekers, resource seekers

as
and strategic asset seekers (Dunning & Lundan, 2008: 67 ffJ) as weil 
the huge trade surplus and the management of extensive currency re-
serves Chinese companies, state-owned or private, hold.

High

Gavernment

Interest

Balancing Foreign
Currency Reserves

Resource-seeking

Strategie asset-seeking

Market-seeking

,

Efficíency-seeking

.

Law

Law

Chinese Corpørate

Interest

High

Source: Own illustration. Based also on Gugler and Boie, 

2008.

Modellmplications

(1) Our framework suggests that an area of increasing OFOI might exist
where government and company interests are high, such as market.
seeking and strategie asset-seeking.

continued on page 74

AIB Insights

13

